28 years old, Male.


Musical Taste


Q3: How did you get into music?

How did I get into music? I guess it would help me sleep as a baby in the car.
Yeah, it started there and then I heard Green Day. And then that's when rock and roll started and I was like, the energy from it, you know, I wanted it—made me feel good. And then kept listening, more like emo bands and stuff like that, which had a connection, you know, to me. I felt something from it and I was like, man, what if I could do that for someone else, you know? I think that would be the start for sure.
That was the first rock band. Yeah, and I was young. I was very young. I was like... I listened a little bit of rap and stuff before that probably, you know, 50 Cent, something like that.

Q4: What inspired you? / Which bands inspired you?
Can we say that Green Day inspired you?

Yeah, absolutely. 100%. 

Any other bands or...?

Yeah, anything from that time. You know, Paramore, Fall Out Boy, Panic at the Disco, AFI, My Chemical Romance slightly, 30 Seconds to Mars slightly—all of those emo bands, I guess, in my younger years, yeah.

Q5: What subgenre(s) of rock/metal do you like? Why?

Emo—yeahю

Why do you like emo?

I think it's in the name right there. It's emotional. I'm an emotional person. I think in that kind of music you could talk about things you're not out talking about with everyone, you know. You write about it, and other people can connect with it, and I think that's super important.

Q5a: Any other subgenres of rock or metal?
Any other subgenres of rock music, metal music that you like?...

I like Canadian power metal. I like... God, all the metal, thrash metal obviously, anything 80s for the most part. You know, hair metal is probably number one for me—Motley Crue, stuff like that, Ratt.
If you're looking for bands, I'd say that the heaviest thing that I enjoy on a daily basis: Cradle of Filth. Like symphonic kind of movie metal. But yeah, all across the board. And there's still new stuff, you know, that I'm starting to learn to like.

Q6: What genres of music do you listen to besides metal?
Anything besides metal... Other genres?

Yeah, everything. Pop, I love pop, you know—everything pop, from, I don't know, Michael Jackson, Prince, to Justin Bieber, to fucking Charlie Puth, Shawn Mendes, all that stuff. Even country: Rodney Adkins, Toby Keith—God—even like Post Malone's country stuff, you know. I'm all over the board, I like everything. I think we got everything in the modern day so why not delve into it?


Musical Background


Q7: Do you play any musical instruments?

I dabble with... definitely guitar. I learned guitar.

Acoustic or electric?

Both, I prefer the electric guitar. I feel like I can do more with it, especially with, you know, now that we have computers, we can alter sound. I hear the screams inside these walls. I'd say that would be the next big one to singing. Drums—not the best at it, but I enjoy it. Could play in an easy band, you know, easy listening stuff, cover band. Piano—I've written a few songs on, I'm proud of that.
Bass—I haven't messed much with, I actually started playing music on a bass guitar, and I thought, how boring, there's not enough strings.

Q8: Do you compose music?

Of course.

What do you write?

I compose entire songs. Usually, they'll start with like a rhythm in my head. It goes two different ways, I would say, for me. I either already have the vocal idea in the lyrics in mind and I'll write it down, I'll record that, and then I'll build off that. Sometimes piano is actually a great one just for the chords to structure it. I haven't actually done that in a while. Saying that out loud is probably going to help me soon. And the guitar—it's a tool for me to build off that. Just something catchy—really simple, catchy. I think those are the best things we could come up with, get that earworm for the listener. But yeah, just basic stuff when writing. I haven't gone overboard really. I mess with logic. I use a lot of samples to gain inspiration; I'll just pop through the menus. What's popular? What are people listening to? What are people like? Let's try that out and see if we can fuse that with my style.

Q8a: How did you learn all that — instruments, DAWs?

Completely self-taught in terms of instruments and vocals. Self-taught as well. When it comes to production stuff—I had my old engineer, his name is Brad Wagner, pretty much show me the ropes, pretty much everything I would say. Even now, if I got a question, I reach out, "Hey man, I know we did this in a session I worked on before, and I had this idea, how do I flush that out." Everything else—I can't remember if anyone ever showed me anything. I just decided, hey, you know what—I had a guitarist in my first band. I didn't like how he played, so I couldn't really write to it. This is not it. We like the same stuff, but he couldn't play it. I'm going to have to learn guitar now. So that's what I did, on and off for a few years, because I didn't really want to play guitar—I just wanted to sing.

Q9: Do you have any formal musical education?

No, nothing formal. Nothing paid. No certificates. I was learning a little bit from Charlie Puth in production, but nothing legal. I just bought programs that I never finished.

Q10: Are you currently a member of a band? What is the name of the band and how long have you been part of it?
Let's talk about being in a band. You are currently a member of a band, right?

Yes.

What is the name of your band?

We're called Fadeless.

Are you a part of this band? What's your role in it?

This is the newest project. I would say it's been probably, since the name was set, just about two years or so, maybe not even. My role—I think my role is mainly I just want to sing. But at the start, everything we're doing right now—I'm writing everything. Samples, whatever. We've got tons and tons of demos, and then bringing on the guys to help flesh out some ideas and have a different perspective.

Q11: Have you been in other bands before? What about your previous band?

We were called Dolly Dearest. It's very Panic at the Disco-y. I felt like nobody's really rivaling Panic at the Disco on the market right now that I could think of. And I also like Frank Sinatra and stuff like that—the vocal range—why don't I give it a go? I love that music too, so that was our style. With that same role—I did everything until we had Brian join in, and he was very advanced and knew a lot of stuff I didn't know, so I learned a lot from him as well. There's someone else I would say production-wise that I learned from.

Q12: How often do you perform live? Do you often perform live?

Not often, though. In the old band, a few times—literally, I think, like two before COVID hit.

Q13: Do you often record in a studio / home studio?
What about studio setup? Do you often record stuff in the studio, or is it a home studio?

Yeah, just a home studio. I got my own setup, learned from Brad, nothing fancy.

What do you record?

Everything. Except drums are usually samples, they're programmed because we don't have my kit mic'd up. But everything else is right there for me, right at my fingertips.

Q14: Do you notice any differences in your vocal approach in studio vs. live?

Yeah, absolutely. I would say absolutely. I'm more comfortable as a studio performer right now, because I like to nail things and take my time. It's just like with filming a TV show or something—you can go back, you can do it over and over until you're comfortable with it. You gotta put in that work. You gotta have the breath to be able to perform an entire song, be it short or long. I think that's definitely a different talent in itself.


Vocal Training and Technique


Q15: How long have you been active as a singer or extreme vocalist?

To a metal? Yeah. Probably—I wouldn't say necessarily extreme. I'll tell you this: I started learning to scream to a band called Hot Thorn Heights. RIP Casey—he was the screamer for that band. I don't think they have one now. When I was 10 years old, I was trying—I wouldn't say I was really great at it then. And then progressed, doing it ever since. Stopped for a while because I was working on pop stuff, and now here we are again, re-learning.

Q16: How did you learn those extreme techniques (screaming, etc)?

Practice. Just mess around until you find out, I guess. You blow your vocals out. If it hurts, definitely stop—which I did not do. It was like, oh, it's raspier, you can't have that thought of, "Oh, it's raspier, it's going to sound better." No, no, it's supposed to be clean. And there is a technique; it's taken this long to figure that out.

Q17: Have you taken any classes on these?

No, not previously. That is the goal, though, because there is always something to learn. I think you only get better.

Q18: Have you had any vocal health issues?

It's a little complex, but I would say yes. I mean, you can easily blow your voice out. I've obviously done that so many times, including recently. So even after all these years, it still can happen.
Sometimes you get lost in the sauce—you just feel it. Sometimes I feel like I need to go to an ENT and check stuff out, just vocal health, because that matters so much more for a starting.

Q19: Do you have any vocal exercises or warm-ups? Do you do any exercise or do you have any routine, like a warm-up, to maintain your voice?

Yeah, I mean, you can go on Spotify, YouTube—what I do, when I do it (which I don't do enough), you can do some jumping jacks, do some push-ups, get yourself pumped up, get your heart rate going.
And follow at least, I'd say, a 10-minute routine, which I either go on Spotify or YouTube and follow. There's a lot of lip trills and stuff like that. That's what makes me feel comfortable. Do I know if it's the best thing, you know, out there to do? No, I'm not sure, but yeah, that's what I do to warm up.


Vocal Style


Q20: How would you describe your vocal style? How would you describe your vocal style?

Pop metal.

Sounds interesting—why? What do you mean?

I don't know. I mean, I like to sing catchy pop hooks, and I do that pretty comfortable, you know, and then just breakdowns and stuff, having some screaming. I don't know, I also like the way that punk does it, where it's almost not screaming necessarily, but yelling. That's more, I think, my flavor, where it feels passionate and not too forced. You know, they're just screaming shit that they believe in. So I'd say I do a little bit of that as well.

Q21: Do you do any growls? Any growls that you do?

That is definitely something I'm leaning towards that I have not perfected enough to necessarily throw it in any of my own stuff. I think I've got a few songs that have slight stuff like that, but not throughout.

Q22: Which vocalists influenced your style? Let's talk about some vocalists that influenced you as a vocalist and influenced your style.

Currently in this band or just in general? Vocalists that inspired me—definitely Brendan Urie from Panic at the Disco. That's probably always been kind of number one for me. Davey Havoc, A.F.I., since I was 14.
I would say Rookie from the Gazette—easily the most comfortable range for me with him. If we want to go more pop, I'd say Bruno Mars. Or more modern—Charlie Puth now; I find I'm pretty good at that kind of stuff as well. I don't know, I went through so many different phases to say somebody inspired me because I'd go as far as to say Vince Neil from Motley Crue, but I don't really do that style anymore.


Perception of Extreme Vocals


Q23: Is intelligibility (pronunciation, being understood) important for you as a vocalist?

You mean like the pronunciation? Is it important for me to know what's being screamed? For me, absolutely. I don't love heavier metal music—I don't understand what they're saying. No, I don't love that. 

So your goal is like—screaming and growling too?

Correct. I think it should be clean and precise.

Q25: Do you think melody or rhythm can help improve intelligibility? And do you think that, I don't know, somehow melody or rhythm can help, you know, improve intelligibility?

Oh, 100%. Because then you got placement and vocal, and sometimes you got a perfect hole for that.

Q26: Just your thoughts on melody in extreme metal in general. Is there a melody?

I would say we could take that to, like, who I consider the masters of that kind of stuff. It would be like Canadian power metal bands—anything over there doing that kind of stuff. There's a band called Unleash the Archers; it's a female-fronted extreme vocalist. She does that really well. It would be a really great example of how I think that plays in the metal, yeah.

You mean some sort of vocalization in screaming?

Yes, and it's very melodic.

Q27: What about rhythm in extreme vocals?

Yeah, I think, I mean, you know, when you talk about extreme vocals, that's kind of broad, especially now in 2025. I'd say it's all important—at least for me personally. I pay attention to those things. It all has to fit like a glove, otherwise we just got chaos, which sometimes is actually what you're looking for. I look for that sometimes. But no, I'd say it's very important, just the same as like a melody.