23 y.o., Male


Musical Taste


Q1: How did you get into music?

It's kind of hard to really pinpoint where along the line I got into music.
I grew up primarily alongside my brother.
We would go out and just skate and always listen to music.
But eventually music became more of a passion rather than skating for the both of us.
And he picked up the guitar and he was like, we should make a band one day and you should sing on the band.
And I was like, okay, whatever. We were little kids so I didn't think anything of it.
But to me and to him it was kind of like a subconscious promise.
So he would always still play guitar and I would always sing even though we weren't thinking about it.
I think the first song that I actually ever learned how to sing was "I Miss You" by Blink-182.
And me and him would duet that song a lot.
Nobody played drums. It was just me and him. I would sing, he’d play guitar.
We would just sing that song. We would just put on the instrumental and just sing that song. That was our favorite song.
Yeah, I would say that was a good entry point to the world of music. Because from that point on it went from, I guess, pop punk to punk into hardcore.
And then from hardcore it went to prog, like prog metal and stuff like that.
And then from that, that's when it branched off into different genres like country music, rap music, R&B, jazz and stuff like that.
So music's always been like a huge part of what I listen to.
So that's, I guess, more so how I got into music. Through just that one song and me and my brother just wanting to set a band that would never start again.

Q2: How did you get into metal? What inspired you?

I think I started getting deeper into metal when I played Need for Speed Most Wanted.
I heard Hand of Blood by Bullet for My Valentine on there.
And I kind of just got infatuated with that kind of metal.
And a lot of the time in middle school I would listen to like metalcore and like emo music and stuff like that.
A lot of Pierce the Veil, Black Veil Brides.
I think at the time, Alice Anna was like my favorite band, my go-to band.
And another one that commonly occurs in a lot of my references is Texas in July, which is like good California metalcore.
I feel like it's the most expressive and organized way to express yourself.
Like jazz, you can be expressive with all you want or anything.
And like in the middle of a set, you can just change something up and people would enjoy it.
But I feel like if you really want to show who you really are, you can show it in a nice calm manner and be expressive about it.
I'd say sort of like a well, I guess artwork, just like a drawing or something.
Like if you're making a painting or something, you're not just going to, you know, put all your paintings in a random order or something.
You want to show it to like invoke feelings or, you know, have a certain way of saying something.
So that's how I got into metal.
I looked at a very different side of it rather than just, oh, this is heavy.
I like the heaviness. Which is also, yeah, I mean, I like heavy stuff.
Yeah, I love heavy stuff too. But not because it's heavy. Not only because it's heavy.
Yeah, it's just a really unorthodox way of expression that not a lot of people see in music.
So I really appreciate what a lot of metal has done for music.

Q3: What metal genres and subgenres do you listen to, and why do you like?

Metalcore, deathcore.
Those are like the two most prominent ones that I focus on simply because I really like melodic stuff.
I like drawn out scenes.
I like ambience.
I like invoking a strong feeling through not only words, but sound.
I don't know if you would look Midwest emo into there, but I love me my emo music too.
I love emo.
Yeah, symphonic death metal.
I really like some symphonic death metal.
And just back to prog. I really like prog.
I really, really love animals as leaders.
I was lucky to see them live once.
And periphery.
Yeah, they played together.
Periphery, animals as leaders, and born of Osiris. Oh, born of Osiris, yeah.
Yeah, they're from here. Yeah, they're amazing.

Q4: What genres of music do you listen to besides metal?

Yeah, like R&B, a lot of reggae, a lot of corridos.
I'm from Mexico, so I listen to a lot of like my native tongue, like a bunch of reggaeton, corridos, tumbados, just general Mexican music.
Japanese metal, too. I really like listening to Japanese metal as well.
Their bass lines are so...
It's opening the gate!
It's like they're getting so popular in the U.S. right now.
Yeah, I think a big part of that is anime.
You know, anime is like a gateway drug to music as well because of anime intros.
So, yeah, Japanese music, I think, because of anime, too. I got deeper into that.
Babymetal is sick, man. Anything that contributes to people coming into like loving metal music, I appreciate.
Like a lot of people don't like Sleep Token. I love Sleep Token.
Not just because of their lyricism and their musical genius, but because they're like a gateway drug for other people to get into metal.


Musical Background


Q5: Do you play any musical instruments?

I play some guitar, and I'm learning how to play drums by drummers teaching me how to play drums currently.
Most of my focus has been going into vocals, so I want to be the best vocalist that I can.
I've recently changed up my diet and the way I manage my time for sleep.
I'm making sure I get more sleep and stuff like that.
I want to put my all into being a vocalist and writing music and maybe along the line just full dive into composing it, too.

Q6: Do you compose music?

I've got two projects. Well, actually three. Two of them are my own. One of them I'm just a vocalist for.
But I just want to be the best that I can and show people, or at least I want people to listen to what I have to say.
I don't want attention attention, but I want people to hear me out on certain experiences that I've had or a story that I'm trying to tell.
Vocals are really fun, man. I've been doing that.

Q7: Do you have any formal musical education?

Have you like sung in a choir or a lot of my stuff is self taught.
So I come from a very poor background.
We didn't have a lot of money growing up or immigrants were barely scraping by.
So I never got a chance to do like anything proper training or stuff like that.
You never had like musical education.
I've had some like I've had coaches and stuff like that that I've got on my own.
But I never like studied study it up until recently because I'm attending AIM now.
So I feel—what is it?
AIM is the Atlanta Institute of Media and Music or Music and Media. And it's located in Duluth.

Q8: Are you currently a member of a band? If so, what is the name of the band and how long have you been part of it?

Yes.
So I have a post-hardcore project called Very Your Knocks. And I've been with them for the better part of two years now.
And then recently, about two months ago, I started a project called Made of Eternity, which is more of like experimental metal, probably more alongside of metalcore.
And then I'm in a metalcore deathcore project called Neferion that we're trying to get everything going with that.
I'm in two of my own bands. And then I'm in another one with my buddy Alex.

Q9: Have you been in other bands before? If so, how many and for how long?
(см. выше — текущие и новые проекты, других не упоминает явно)

Q10: How often do you perform live?

Well, Very Your Knocks is currently on a hiatus.
Made of Eternity, we usually just meet up once a week.
Neferion, we already got everything written, we're just making a couple of changes.
Currently, no. Made of Eternity, we are currently making a setlist. Neferion's setlist is pretty much done. We just got to work out a few things. And then Very Your Knocks, like I said, we're on hiatus. But I have performed live.

Q11: Have you recorded extreme vocals in a professional studio before? If so, what was the experience like?

We do all of our recordings in-house. Pretty much. Let's say recording at home.

Q12: Do you notice any differences in your vocal approach between live performances and studio recordings?

I feel like at home I'm a lot more comfortable because it's just me and my mind rather than a studio or with friends.
Because I have a real problem with setting high expectations for myself in front of others. Like I don't want to exceed everybody's expectations.



Vocal Training and Technique


Q13: How long have you been active as a singer or extreme vocalist?

I've been doing harsh vocals, like extreme vocals, I want to say the past two, two and a half years now.

Q14: How did you learn extreme vocal techniques?

I first started because I listened to a song by Joffer, Cowboy, and I listened to that song. I forgot what song it was. But I was like, maybe I can do that.
And so one day in the shower when nobody was home, I was showering and I decided to try to do harsh vocals in the shower and it did not go good.
I felt like pins and needles were in my throat.
And so I wanted to nail that down so bad it got to a point where I would do it when people were home and my mom would knock on my door and ask if I'm okay.
In the middle of the night I would always practice when everybody was asleep. Sometimes my mom would wake up and she's like, are you okay?
My mom is very religious.
So as soon as she hears me try to do pig squeals and stuff like that, she starts praying. Really?
Yeah. My mom is precious. That's cool.
Yeah.
But for the most part, it's just a lot of trial and error from myself and feeling what's right for me.
I have watched YouTube tutorials like Extreme Vocal Institute or Phil Boseman YouTube channel if you know who that is. He's the singer for Whitechapel.
So a lot of my inspirations for heavier stuff comes from him.
But my main inspiration for getting into vocals period is probably JTKV from Era slash Texas in July.
He's been my standard of a frontman since I could remember.

Q15: Have you taken any vocal lessons? If so, did these lessons cover extreme techniques?

I've had some like I've had coaches and stuff like that that I've got on my own.
But I never like studied study it up until recently because I'm attending AIM now.

Q16: Do you follow any specific vocal exercises or routines to maintain your voice?

I do. I practice it twice a week just to make sure everything is still in shape.
I do a lot of breathing exercises, stretches, and just easing my way into it
because your voice is literally just like your vocal cords and everything.
They're all muscle. It's like working out a bicep.
You've got to warm up your bicep before you start doing heavier stuff.
So if you don't watch yourself, you're going to hurt yourself.
So I make sure to practice at least twice a week just to make sure everything's okay.
I do have vocal warm-up techniques for when I'm about to record something with my friends or even just by myself.
So it's very important to follow those kinds of stuff and warm-up techniques.

Q17: Have you ever experienced vocal health problems due to extreme singing? If so, please describe.

At first, yeah. When you're always starting, you're always going to do stuff wrong, but not within the past two years.


Vocal Style


Q18: How would you describe your vocal style?

A lot of high vocal fries.
So I really like that kind of stuff, like getting sort of like an anger out.
Like I'm mad at you, like, get out of here or something like that.
I really like that kind of stuff.
I really like involving tongue techniques into my vocal styles too. So you'll hear a lot of tongue techniques in my words.

Q19: Which bands or vocalists have influenced your vocal style?

So I guess like just a regular gut roll like... or something like that.
Stuff like that. I don't really know what you would call that, like that second one, but I really like doing that stuff.
Sounds evil.
Yeah, like the thought of a human being able to produce such a sound is mind-blowing to me, but here we are, I'm able to do it.

Q20: Which vocal techniques do you use most frequently?
(см. выше — high fries, tongue techniques, gut rolls)


Perception of Extreme Vocals


Q21: Is intelligibility an important goal for you as a vocalist?

To me, yes. That's just my personal opinion. To others, a lot of people just have fun with it, so they just do a bunch of incoherent and unintelligible things, but I feel like it's very, very important for you as a vocalist to make sure you get your point across to somebody, whether it just be something that you're messing around with, like, oh, yeah, I raced a car last week. You got to tell somebody you raced a car last week. You can't just go in there...
You got to let them know you raced a car last week, or either it was like, I got my heart broken. Let them know you got heartbroken.
It's a song for a reason, and it's a recording for a reason.
You want people to hear it, not just listen to sound.
But there are some people who like just sound clutter, so I can see the appeal of that.
But personally, it is very, very important for me to let the listener know what they're hearing.

Q22: How do you make your lyrics intelligible while using extreme vocal techniques?

I'd say when it comes to my screaming, I combine a lot of my head voice and my chest voice with each other.
That way, I can get a more clear... like, vowels are, I guess, more enunciated syllables whenever I do my vocals.

Q23: In your opinion, why do some people (especially non-metalheads), find extreme vocals difficult to understand or enjoy?

I feel like people like to think they like loud, and another part of it is that people don't understand the concept of distortion.
It's hard to put into words, but people will understand if a girl is just talking and she has vocal fry like that and everything.
But as soon as you elevate that higher, it's like that annoying girl that talks like that, it's like she's yelling at you.
And people don't like to get yelled at.
But you have to have a certain mindset when you listen to music or else you're just listening to a person speak. I'm a firm believer in that.
When Kendrick Lamar drops a new song or a new album, people don't just automatically be like, oh, this is cool, this is hard because of the beat and whatnot. People are listening to him speak, and there is a dedicated fan base out there to dissect vocals or dissect what he's saying and stuff like that.
But there's not a lot of that in metal. There's not a lot of dissecting, simply because it's loud, because people think it's scary to hear somebody yell at them.
And I guess against metalheads, there's always a stereotype like, oh, you're a metalhead, you must worship the devil or something.
And I was like, no, dude, it's just like, I like what these people are talking about. I like how it sounds.
I like how they're conveying their emotions or how they're putting everything into words, because it just vibes with me.
It really is just personal preference at the end, but I feel like people are just scared of falling into that stereotype.
And the sooner you let go of falling into that stereotype, the better you can understand why people are giving into that.

Q24: How do you think about pitch and “melody” in extreme vocals?

Yeah, definitely. Yeah. Vocals are, they're an instrument, they're an acoustic instrument.
So like it being left out of that kind of argument is absurd to me. It is the first instrument anybody ever learns is how to speak. It's their vocal cords.
That's like the basis of all sound, right? Well, to like the humans.
So the basis of all sound is the first thing you hear. When a baby comes out the womb, what do you hear? Crying, right?
That's their first... You hear extreme vocals.
You hear extreme vocals. You're right. It all starts there, man.
So like the fact that that even is like an argument at all, like I said, it's absurd to me.
You can convey anything with your words if you play your mind to it.