32 y.o., Male


Musical Taste


Q3: How did you get into music?

I was born into, I was born in Georgia. I was born in Georgia, Atlanta. I was the only Indian guy in my school and my brother showed me rock. I kind of just got into rock, like Linkin Park. So I started with Linkin Park's Hybrid Theory album and I kind of just did my own. Even though I was the outcast in my school, I kind of just stuck with what I liked. Even though I was like, show this, show this, showed all these different genres of music, I always stuck with rock and it's got progressively more heavier. You know, like Linkin Park, Becky Benjamin, I know, like Sum-41, you name it. And then it's got As I Lay Dying, Delver Wears Prada, like it just got more intense and I love that. Heavier and heavier.

Q4: How did you get into metal? What inspired you?

Oh, I was in three bands growing up. Well, I started, I was in multiple projects, you know. I believed, I figured out how to scream after playing the drums. I think, I think, like holding a mic and talking to people was more of my route, because I'm a goofball. They gave me a microphone, like, I'm more of an entertainer than playing an instrument, like hitting, you know, like drums. But yeah, I joined a band. I figured out, I made some connections, figured out what I'm good at. I joined another band and I joined another band until I started my own band. Because usually bands that I joined, they usually have like issues they need to figure out, or there's someone in the band that really sucks and that owns a lot of things and like you can't work with them. So, like, what I wanted to do is start my own band and have everything proper and be, like, fun to work with. And so that was like, that's what we've been a family for three years. The band that I'm in, Insomni, we've been really good and tight and I love that.

Q5: What metal genres and subgenres do you listen to, and why do you like?

Yeah, post hardcore. I love, like, the good balance of, like, super singy stuff with, like, the heavy. A lot of bands can't pull it off, but a lot of bands can, so I love that contrast. And then there's maybe some, like, super heavy stuff where they don't even sing. Like, maybe more, like, deathcore, metalcore vibes, though. Like, Slaughter to Prevail, because, like, they have a bunch of melodies, but they're not super deathcore. They have hints of it, and they have a good contrast of both.

Q6: What genres of music do you listen to besides metal?

Yeah, I love, like, house music, I love some rap, I like stoner stuff, because I smoke a lot, you know, I be chilling. I love cannabis.
House, I love Rufus Dassault. I'm obsessed with this guy. You know Rufus Dassault? He is a perfect balance of, like, house EDM without, like, the crazy, crazy drops. He keeps it very chill, and he has beautiful vocals. His vocal cadences are so clean and hooking, and it just kills it. It just murders it.


Musical Background


Q7: Do you play any musical instruments?
Yeah, I started from drums, started air drumming in fifth grade. I was air drumming the markers that we had in fifth grade. I would sit there and just air drum the songs that I loved, and people would look at me like I'm crazy.
Just drums and vocals, no. I can play guitar, you know. I'm an expert on guitar.
I love that game, too. I recently learned that there is another game which is similar to Guitar Hero that people also play, but you have to actually play the guitar. Yeah, probably. Good, like a smith. I think it's called, like, a guitar smith? Probably. I'm not sure. But that looked pretty wild.

Q8: Do you compose music?

So, I write my own vocals. I have my band to, like, make the tracks with producers, but I usually write my own vocals.
For a lot of the songs. I'll have some parts. I'll take what I write to a producer and they'll just kind of, like, shape-shift some things and they'll take the foundation of what I built and tweak it. But it's creative. If you go there empty-handed, you're not going to get anything done. You're going to have a producer stuff, but if you're a real musician, you want to input your inputs and you want to see it grow from there.

Q9: Do you have any formal musical education?

No. Fully self-taught? Very self-taught. 100% self-taught. I mean, I'm not proud of it. I would say that maybe if I did some vocal lessons, it would be cool. But I feel like the teacher would already be like, you got to stop this, you got to stop this. You can't tell me things that I don't want to stop doing and I already know. I love being self-taught, but I'm not saying that's the right way and there's ways to do it, the ways to figure it out. But I learn everything from passion, like just having a heart forever. If you put your mind to it, you're going to do it. You're going to figure it out. So you don't need a teacher at that point.

Q10: Are you currently a member of a band? If so, what is the name of the band and how long have you been part of it?

Yeah, actually. I am a member of a band. After the first project I was in, we did a good job. I started my own band and it's called Insomni.
It's based off the name Insomnia, but I'm the vocalist and I own and manage that band. We're a new metalcore based out of Atlanta.
How long have you guys been? About three years. We obtained Ricky. We just got Ricky last year. Unfortunately, we had to kick out two members. They became dads and they had to live their life. They had bigger responsibilities.

Q11: Have you been in other bands before? If so, how many and for how long?

The bands I played before? Yeah, there was The Convalescent, Winter Is Coming, and Artessa. All great bands. I learned a lot from all of them. There was always something, I feel like there was something to learn from each band because no band is perfect. Every band has their issues that they're trying to overcome or maybe there is an issue within the band and you don't want to be a part of it anymore. You never know what you're going to get hit with. It was all a learning curve. I made a bunch of connections. Before I dropped Insomni, I was ready with an album. I had a bunch of features. It was produced properly. I put my heart and soul into it. I was just ready to do something on the legit side that's going to last. All these projects I was in before, they're dead. They're not active anymore.

Q12: How often do you perform live?

How often? We did a lot in the beginning. We took a year break from releasing music, but we played the Masquerade. We played at Altar. We played at Purgatory three times. We played at Heaven once and we played at Hell once. We opened up for Bloodywood. You know Bloodywood? The Indian band. We opened up for them. I'm Indian myself. It was really cool that they asked me. It sold out. They came to Atlanta. Yeah. They sold out. The flute. They had the Indian, like the dolak. The Indian drums. It was so beautiful to watch them set up. One of the vocalists made me tea.


Vocal Training and Technique


Q13: How long have you been active as a singer or extreme vocalist?

I would say since I was 21 years old, like 22, I was always singing, screaming in the car. But I took it more serious once I learned how to growl. Once I learned how to growl when I was 24, I was really good at yells, highs, and mids growing up when I was younger. And then when I hit, when I really figure out how to do all that, it was like I had to join a band.
Yeah, so since I was like 21, I started when I was 17, but I could only do highs back then. Like the old Dolores Prada, he could be like... And just really hit highs.

Q14: How did you learn extreme vocal techniques?

Can we say that that is like fry? You can do the fry highs, but the more piercing highs, you can only do that for an era of time. You're going to grow out of it. It's very hard to do. Consistently, when you start doing highs, my theory is that you will eventually turn into doing fry highs, because that's something that you just grow out of, like puberty.
There is a difference between just highs and fries. There has to be. What is it? It's a delivery and how it's vocalized. It could be a piercing high and how loud it is too. Like a fry might not be as loud as just a regular delivery of a high, but then that will deteriorate over time. My theory is that your highs will eventually go away, unfortunately. Like with the age? Yeah, they'll turn into like a Marge Simpson.
Yeah, because it is what it is, and it's inevitable, but people have figured it out. You have to have good vocal warm-ups, good vocal stretches, open up your lungs with your cords, and then you can kind of still hit those notes again.

Q15: Have you taken any vocal lessons? If so, did these lessons cover extreme techniques?

Learning, I would definitely find myself having a scratchy throat, and I would listen to my body every time I tried something new and I would feel something weird. I'd stop doing it, because you don't want to hurt yourself. So it was a learning curve, and the car is the best place to do it, in my opinion, because we drive everywhere and a line of traffic sucks, so why not just listen to music and scream and have an exorcism? You know what I mean. So I was able to, and you can hear yourself because you're secluded, so you can really hear the sound of your voice.
And not distract any other people, right? You are not the first one who mentions practicing and learning in a car. It's the best way, and it's common.

Q16: Do you follow any specific vocal exercises or routines to maintain your voice?

You mentioned warming up. Do you do any other routine to maintain your voice?
Yeah. I used to take some CBD tincture before a show. I used to take tincture and just let it dribble down my throat to just calm, to make it soothe it. It wouldn't coat it or anything like that, but it was just because I'm about to just go off. And then I found myself having a dry throat from that, so I stopped doing that. And then I just kind of just use a honey connector, which is great. And then I have a bunch of vocal exercises that I like to do with my guitar player when we drive down to shows. We're doing these hums, these practices.
In the car again. In the car again. We're on the way to doing something. We don't want to do it in the back of the venue and be loud, because some of these vocal exercises are very funny. And they're like... And you have to get louder and louder as you do it, so it's good to have your own space when you work out, when you do the vocal exercises.
Your guitarist also sings. You said that you do these exercises with your guitarist. Yep, because he does backing vocals.


Vocal Style


Q17: How would you describe your vocal style?

I love that question, because people have always... Whenever I'm out and about, I'll hit them with a low, a high, a growl, and a brie, just to set them on edge. They're really just like... And it's very diverse. It has a bunch of ranges, and it can sound like this, it can sound like that, or it can just sound like something of my own, which I want to be more focused on, is having my own delivery, my own approach, but have a high, a mid, a low, all in the same verse. I want to start off like... And then just hit all these ranges all in the same sequence, and that's what I love to write, because I think it's impressive if you can just do that live, effortlessly, and it's more creative when you listen to it, if you can hit all these ranges. It's more cooler, in my opinion.

Q18: Which bands or vocalists have influenced your vocal style?

Let's see. I love the bands. I love It Dies Today, Devil Driver, Old Devil Driver, Old It Dies Today, Azalea Dying, Feeder to the Sharks, and Old Miss May I. Those two bands, and Cali Band. Cali Band, oh my gosh. These bands, they're so consistent with their albums, and their vocal cadences have always been great to me since I was a kid. Especially these bands that I mentioned, Devil Rush Parada, they do a good job of hitting highs, lows, and getting fucking heavy with it. You know what I mean? Just having fun. And the beautiful chorus. Beautiful chorus and left field, and they just make it all work. Having all those vocal cadences, the bands that I just mentioned, they all do a good job of it, and their delivery is strong. It was very inspiring to listen to that as a kid. I wanted to be the guy writing the vocals, and screaming, and singing, and trying to like, I want to do that over a track, because I was inspired to just like, I have my own version of what I want to do here, and I was so stuck on it. I had to write songs. I had to.

Q19: Which vocal techniques do you use most frequently?

I'll hit them with a low, a high, a growl, and a brie, just to set them on edge. They're really just like... And it's very diverse. It has a bunch of ranges.

Q20: Do you notice any differences in your vocal approach between live performances and studio recordings?

Yeah, actually. Live, when I'm standing up and I'm moving around, I can hit some piercing highs. When I'm just like, really high highs. And the vocal booth, when I'm recording studio, I'm sitting there, standing there, and it's a lot harder to hit the highs. How I can know how I can do it at a live show. But everything else, I can do the same.
Why do you think it's harder for you? I feel like, I don't know, the highs just have, they have it's way. If you're really good at doing it, like, you gotta, very catably, like that's what we do in a lot of our old songs.
There's like a lot of like, it's very like, it's strenuous on your voice, obviously. But I just did that sitting down. But in the studio, when you're standing up, it's just, it's a little different. It's, maybe that's just for me. It's different for everyone. I feel like it might be different for everyone. Sometimes it's on, or sometimes it's off. I think that might have come, might just come with just older age. Cause when I was a kid, I'd just be like, high, like I'd be like the gremlin, like the goblin of like, yes. And then like, as I get older, you kinda see it just kind of, kind of, you literally feel it fading away. Like you gotta do more fries, like more like, more tunnel stuff. But I just make it work.


Perception of Extreme Vocals


Q21: Is intelligibility an important goal for you as a vocalist?

Yeah. The lyrics? Yeah. I think people should have a connection to what's being said, even though they might understand, they might not understand it off the bat. You know, like when you listen to a song, you might not even know what they're even talking about, but it sounds good to you. But then once you listen to it again and again and again, you start listening, you start hearing the words and words, but like if you read the lyrics and love the song, that means the fan's gonna love it 10 times more. It just 10x'd your song because like everything, melodies, everything was good, but the lyrics were also good. So like, you know, people like want to hear dark stuff. People want to hear depressing stuff. People want to hear more empowering stuff. You know, it is what it is. But I like to keep things less depressant and more uplifting, but not like, Oh yeah, Jesus or like God or none of that, none of that, but like more of like, like uplifting in the way that like you can get over this battle that you're going through and just live your best life, like without any higher power, whatever, any of that shit. But it's more of the fact that like you can always do things if you just believe yourself, like tell yourself that you can do it. Like we're all capable of doing whatever we want. We just kind of put our mind to it. That's literally what I write about. Make our own path, being the black sheep of like what we want. We're not told to do this. We shouldn't read a book for our rest of our life. We shouldn't work for this. We need to do what we want. And that comes from creativity within ourselves that we have to acknowledge and find. And so that's what music does for me. And I keep it very, I keep it very uplifting. Maybe some, it's dark too. I have some dark lyrics, but like it's more overpowering than it is depressing.

Q22: How do you make your lyrics intelligible while using extreme vocal techniques?
(делает акцент на разнообразии техник и чётком продумывании вокала и смысловой подаче)

Q23: In your opinion, why do some people (especially non-metal listeners) find extreme vocals difficult to understand?
(прямого ответа не было, но высказывалась мысль выше о том, что не все сразу понимают смысл и “мелодии”, но с повторными прослушиваниями и знакомством с лирикой приходит больше понимание и любовь к песне)

Q24–Q25–Q26–Q27: How do you think about pitch, melody, rhythm in extreme vocals?

What about melody and rhythm in extreme vocals? Like not in clean vocals. Do you think that rhythm and melody can like convie or just express, can help you express yourself better in extreme vocals?
Yeah. Cause when you're talking about like when you're screaming and like the cadences of that. So those are very important to me cause like those, anyone can just scream I feel like and just have a mumbo jumbo and wait for a pretty chorus. But if you have like cool like, and you go, you do like the whole talky stuff, like you talk in between. I feel like that's always worked out for me. People have always like, because they say the lyrics back and they can like kind of relate to it more when it's like, cause I will never understand the way that you die. Cause like there's like that in and out kind of thing. And like that's something that's like kind of always worked and like from the beginning. And it's very crucial that like, what was the question again? I've been going off topic. Rhythm and melody. Is there, do you think that there is melody in extreme vocals? Like in screaming, growling? Yeah, there's a bunch of melodies in every song. The vocals and like the songs that we hear that are extremely like interface, they have like, they have to start off, they usually have to go with like the bass, the double bass, they have to go with the drums and to their pattern, but they have to come up with their own cadence, which is a beautiful thing. It's hard to do. But yeah, melody is central with every music. There's melodies in everything there has to be. I mean, there's bands that might lack in it, but like then there's bands that excel in it. Like this melody, melody, this melody, all the melodies are just like having a baby. You know what I mean?

Q25a: What about gutturals? Is there melody in gutturals?

There can be a hundred percent. There can be low gutturals, there can be high gutturals, there can be like a fry guttural, there's a way, it can be deep, you know what I mean? It can be like an impact. I would say it's limited in melodies because it's very saturated and it's pretty much a couple of notes you're going to hit with a guttural, it's going to be like that dark. So maybe more like a melodic contour, not a melody itself, something like low, mid, high or... Yeah, I would say that there is melodies in growls for sure. There's ways that people can project it differently and sound lighter, like more growly, more raspier.