26 y.o., Male


Musical Taste


Q3: How did you get into music?

Um whenever I was really young I was really into my sister showed me a lot of like you know stuff that was on MTV whenever I was really young like first grade like My Chemical Romance and some other bands like that and then she also ended up putting me on to Slipknot which was like kind of more of the more extreme side of things and I kind of just went down the rabbit hole after that I was really into like nu-metal a lot whenever I was really young and then I discovered metalcore and deathcore and now hardcore.

Q4: How did you get into metal? What inspired you?

Yeah pretty much my sisters, pretty much it was your inspiration.

Q5: What metal genres and subgenres do you listen to, and why do you like?You mentioned bunch of subgenres like deathcore metalcore hardcore any others?

Other than that, probably just some nu-metal stuff,some groove metal stuff here and there, like Sepultura but yeah that's pretty much it for me, probably mainly those four I'm like very been to hardcore a lot the last few years.

Why do you like say hardcore?

Hardcore specifically I really like because it's not only like a genre it's very much like a community across the whole country and it's a it's a lifestyle as well you know a lot of these people like sell their souls to this stuff and they like being straight-edge and there's a lot of history that goes into it and yeah it's just very culture rich and people really really like everyone in hardcore like knows each other like all around the country, it's like a big community, and yeah other than that, it's just a lot of that ethos of it is like a lot of that stuff I align with the most. Deathcore was really like whenever I was really young, I used to listen to like a lot of old like Chelsea Grin and like Parkway Drive, they're kind of more metalcore-y, and Job For a Cowboy - they're like adjacent and it was more so like the sound of it back then I really liked like spooky scary stuff and I was really young and
it was really heavy and like abrasive and that was a lot of the reason why I really liked it when I was young I still I still enjoy it but I just don't listen to it as much.

Q6: What genres of music do you listen to besides metal?

I listened to a lot of like R&B and neo soul, and a lot of like classic rock stuff. I had like a huge jazz bebop phase whenever I was 18. Yeah. Oh, and I really liked like 90s boom bap for a while, and some like old Memphis rap for a good while as well. I don't listen to those either of those too much anymore, but yeah, that's about it for me.


Musical Background


Q7: Do you play any musical instruments?
Yeah yeah I play drums bass and guitar and I I'm like a self-taught pianist
but I don't claim it at all I haven't practiced it in forever but I understand
the piano and how it works yeah drums bass and guitar mainly I can pick them
up and I can play them

Q8: Do you compose music?

Yeah, yeah. Everything original for my bands and stuff, yeah. So, oh yeah, let's talk about your band. Uh-huh, yeah. Godbust, it's like a heavy hardcore project. You know, we actually used to play whenever I was like 16-17. It was just me and one drummer. I played the guitar and did the vocals, and we did it for like a year, played around town for a little while. And we stopped, and I went off and had other musical ventures for like eight years. Then, me and the drummer kind of reunited about two years ago and we've been doing it since then.

Q9: Do you have any formal musical education?

I don't. I'm self-taught on everything. Oh yeah, the instrument, yeah — self-taught. Never had any lessons or anything. I was just on YouTube playing a lot when I was a kid. Yeah, my parents hate it. They hate it. We're from Pakistan, so like, you know, they came here to America for me to like become like a doctor or a lawyer or a dentist or something. And so, yeah, I'm a car mechanic and I just play a lot of music. They hate it, so they never really tried to push me along in that path. I was myself.

Q10: Are you currently a member of a band? If so, what is the name of the band and how long have you been part of it?

Yeah, um, Godbust. It's like a heavy hardcore project. We actually used to play whenever I was like 16-17... (story as above) Me and the drummer kind of reunited about two years ago, and we've been doing it since then.

Q11: Have you been in other bands before? If so, how many and for how long?

We stopped and I went off and had other musical ventures for like eight years. Then me and the drummer kind of reunited about two years ago.

Q12: How often do you perform live?

Oh, yeah, yeah. All the time. Right now, we haven't done too many this year — maybe like two or three — because we've been working on this album that's coming out on the 30th actually. But we've got a bunch of stuff lined up and a tour in September, so I'm excited. I'm excited. Yes, I'm super excited, man.

Q13: What is your role in the band / Do you also sing?

I mean, I write all the music. Me and my buddy Josiah — if I'm not writing the song, he's writing it. I book all the shows. I make all the artwork. I do all the graphic design. I booked the tour (actually, this time, I'm having some help with my other buddy; I tried, and I just got too much going on right now, so I was asking for help). But, yeah, we do everything ourselves. I try to keep everything in-house. I don't really like to go outsourcing for things — I just like to keep a DIY, you know.

Do you also sing in the band?
Yeah, yeah, I do. I do the vocals and guitar.

Is it so interesting so you play guitar?
Yeah, it kicks my butt, man...

Are you the only guitar?
Yeah, yeah, so that's three-piece. It's a three-piece, so it's just guitar, vocals, and drums.

Q14: Do you record your own music?

Yeah, we do that as well. Josiah takes care of that. Me and him go — I kind of just point him in the right directions for the mixing and stuff like that, because hardcore kind of has like a sound to it that is kind of universal for all the bands. Like key elements that make hardcore sound like hardcore, I guess you could say, like the guitar tone and the snare tone. Yeah, the snare is always just like pops through the whole mix all the time. Then the guitars are very mid-heavy. So it's just — and you can get away with not doing either of those and that's kind of what our first album sounded like. But it kind of like polishes it more to sound right whenever you do it that way in my opinion.


Vocal Training and Technique


Q15: How did you learn extreme vocal techniques?

So, I just kind of listened and tried to emulate. I learned with YouTube as well, excuse me, growing up. I used to try and like do them properly whenever I was young, and it was kind of weird. I was in like 9th, 10th grade, and whenever Gutbust started, whenever I was like 16–17, like 11th, 12th grade, I started just yelling really loud. I would throw my voice out, and I'd lose my voice, and I'd almost pass out whenever we were playing. I was doing it very wrong. After that, whenever I restarted Gutbust eight years later, that's whenever I tried to start doing vocals again in the extreme style, and I kind of honed in more on the technique of things and trying to like properly do it so I can do it more sustainably, for however long I want to do it — for the rest of my life, you know. And so, I'm kind of self-taught in that as well, but I looked up some like Mongolian throat singing techniques that isolate your false vocal cords. So, yeah, that's what I was doing for like ten minutes outside whenever I was warming up. That's all I do, I just sit there and make funny sounds until I'll test out the screams and you know, see how they sound.

Q16: Have you taken any vocal lessons?

No, no lessons in that regard either. I probably — it would help a lot, man, it would help a lot. I'd be a lot better of a musician and vocalist if I got vocal lessons whenever I was younger, or even now.

Q17: Have you ever experienced vocal health problems due to extreme singing?

Yeah, like whenever I was 16, 17, and it was just the original Gutbust band, I was just yelling, man. I remember so many times I'd be on that stage like, "I'm gonna pass out," like my fingers would start tingling and my head would get numb, man. I was like walking the line on it. And now I don't. I've kind of honed in on it. I'm kind of — like, what I do is like a hybrid growl/slash scream, like actually yelling/slash growling at the same time, and yeah, that seems to work pretty well for me. I like it. It sounds kind of unique. But if, when I'm playing guitar, if I'm not paying attention to the technique, it's pretty easy to start throwing my voice out, so I have to be careful.

Q18: Do you follow any specific vocal exercises or routines to maintain your voice?

Yeah, yeah, that's what I was doing for like ten minutes outside whenever I was warming up. That's all I do — I just sit there and make funny sounds until I'll test out the screams and, you know, see how they sound.

You mentioned Mongolian throat singing, yeah. Any other routines that you do? 

That's really it, because I know a lot of people do like the bubbles thing with their lips where they're like "brrr," and that is supposed to target your false vocal cords as well. But I just feel like the Mongolian throat singing isolates it completely. You're not using any different part of your throat — it's the same part of your throat that you use to burp. And so, it's kind of hard to access that. A lot of people don't know how to do the throat singing thing; you have to develop it, it doesn't just sound like right off the bat. It sounds a little bit weird and over, like, probably a month it took me. It becomes more defined and in unison, that "buh-buh-buh" sound.

Do you use it in your music?

No, I don't. Yeah, just just to warm up, yeah.


Vocal Style


Q19: How would you describe your vocal style?

Um, I would say, like I was saying, I'd say it's a hybrid yell/slash growl. Yeah, it's really loud, you know, because a lot of people who do the growling stuff and they're doing it properly, it's not super loud, but since I'm yelling while doing that, it's loud.

So your growling is loud?

Yeah, it's because I'm yelling at the same time, though. Because I can do like the classic, you know, like deathcore style, like metalcore style vocals that everyone mostly does, but I try to mix in the yelling with it at the same time.

Q20: Which bands or vocalists have influenced your vocal style?

Yeah, for sure. I really like Built Upon Frustration, and they're an older heavy hardcore — they call it beatdown sometimes; they're up that alley. And then another band called I Swear to God — they're there. I feel like that's kind of what I'm trying to emulate a lot of the time, but in my opinion, I feel like those guys, they just sound like that, man. They just yell, and that's how they sound, because that's a lot of the style in hardcore. They don't really try to do vocals; they just take the mic and yell into it. And some of those guys are just like big, and they just have that deep voice, and that's just what they — they sound like a freaking football coach or something, you know.

Q21: Which vocal techniques do you use most frequently?

What I do is like a hybrid growl/slash scream, like actually yelling/slash growling at the same time. I try to mix in the yelling with it at the same time.

Q22: Do you notice any differences in your vocal approach between live performances and studio recordings?

I try not to, man. Sometimes, haha, it's hard to be consistent sometimes whenever, you know, the monitor, the studio, the stage, doesn't, you know, sound very good or — like, versus, like, the practice space versus a show versus the studio. I feel like the practicing and the studio I sound perfect, exactly how I intend to. But whenever the show happens, there's just so many variables that kind of cause me to, you know, I'll just start yelling or, like, my technique gets bad pretty much.

Do you try to sound the way you want to sound, like...?

Yeah, yeah, yeah. I mean, I basically just try to — like, the practice space, I can hear myself really well, and so I don't have to overcompensate for, like, the speakers being loud or me not being able to hear myself, and so you just aren't always promised that at the shows, especially these DIY shows, because, like, it's just people, you know, trying to put things together, doing their best. So a lot of the time, wearing earplugs though helps me, because then I can hear myself better.

Well, when you have no earplugs?

I try to avoid it, but sometimes I'll, uh, because I don't want to mute out the band completely, so I'll just put one in. But yeah, I gotta watch it with that too, 'cause my ears can't be — yeah, can't be messing with that; they're precious.


Perception of Extreme Vocals


Q23: Is intelligibility an important goal for you as a vocalist?

Uh-huh. Is it important for you so that people can understand lyrics?
Yeah, for me specifically, yes. There's a lot of genres, like, that almost treat the vocals as like an instrument. I don't know if you're familiar with core, like grindcore stuff.
Yeah, stuff. Stuff — I've heard of that band; haven't checked them out so I can't speak on their vocals too much, but I'm not very into that side of things. But, like, a lot of those guys, like when their voice sounds like a frog, you know what I mean, like that type of stuff, like I can see that being appreciated more as like an instrument than like someone actually trying to get a point across.
But for me, like, I'm trying to say something, and, yeah, it's important to me.

Q24: Do you think you sound intelligible?

Um, I'd say it's like a 50–50. It's definitely way more intelligible than, like, classic deathcore vocals or, like, metalcore vocals, because, like I was saying, it's more of like a yell mixed into that. But yeah, that — it is important to me though. Yeah, I think it's pretty, I think it's pretty intelligible. I'd say, like, 65, 50%.

Q25: Is there anything that you do to make your lyrics more intelligible?

Um, nothing specifically other than the hybrid yelling/slash growling. I think that's kind of the most I do in that department.

Q26: Do you think there is a melody in screaming or growling?

Yeah, yeah, for sure. You know, I think, like, people who just, you know, hang out like in a straight line — that's kind of boring; it's kind of... I don't do it too much, you know. Some people go from here, from down here all the way up here, and I'm more like right here, right here. I don't have like a huge range or anything, and I — well, I kind of do, but I just don't use it too much. I stay in like my low mid and high mid range a lot of the time. In mid and mid range, I don't really hit like the low gutturals or anything like that in the Gutbust songs or anything, and there's like two songs where, in total, there are four lines where I hit the actual high screams.

Q27: What about rhythm in extreme vocals?

Oh, big time. Big time. I'm big on a groove. I love like bouncy groove stuff — stuff around that realm, that was the word I was trying to think, but yeah. Yeah, big on rhythms. You know, I'm a drummer, just like you, so more so than anything else, honestly. And so, that's — I'm thinking about that a lot of the time whenever I'm writing the lyrics. I'm pretty much just like trying to figure out the cadence of the lyrics before I even write them a lot of the time. I know some people do it the other way.