26 y.o., Female

Musical Taste

Q3: How did you get into music?

It started when I was really young. I grew up in a very musical family. Music has always been a very, uh, it's always, like, given me such an emotional, like, deep—even physical—response. I remember being as young as, like, maybe four years old and just, like, falling from something so beautiful that I heard.
And so I have always, you know, just had such an emotional, like, deep attachment to music. And um, this is one of those genres that are just so emotionally evoking, you know what I mean?

Q4: How did you get into metal? What inspired you?

Well, I mean, it's different from, you know, most other genres that you hear—mainstream, you know. But, um, it kind of came from like, you know, a time in my life when I was like trying to figure out how to feel emotions. And, you know, different genres for different emotions, this one was great for expressing, like, frustration, sadness, anger, but it can also be like a very happy thing as well.

Q5: What metal genres and subgenres do you listen to, and why do you like?
Can you name some, because we know that metal music has a bunch of subgenres?

Yes, probably more than any other music.
I find myself being drawn more to like metalcore and hardcore, but honestly I'm not picky. I just like metal music in general. More so like modern stuff; more like 80s hair metal and such, like I'm not super into. It's not very stimulating to me, so I need a little bit more grit in the vocals. 

Doesn't hit us, yeah? 

It doesn't hit us hard. So any—basically metal genre in modern time—it's great for me.

Q5a: Could you name some bands or musicians that have inspired you?

Oh my god, there's so many!
So when I was like 13: Of Mice and Men, A Day to Remember—they were huge for me.
And then, you know, I still listen to them. The Plot In You, Spiritbox became more of my recent ones, Bring Me the Horizon—yeah, those were my earlier days, which I still fully indulge in, like I love them. But it for sure has kind of built—it's been a gradual getting into harder versions of metal.

Q5b: Which Bring Me the Horizon era is your favorite?

Oh, Sempiternal, my god. That was like—that album will never die.

Which is the least favorite?

Oh, I would have to say, um, I forget what it's called, but it's the one with the umbrella logo. It's one of their kind of newer ones, I believe from like 2017 or so.

That's the Spirit?

That's the Spirit. That was when he kind of took a little step back from vocals. But yeah, so it's still a great album like just—yeah.

What about their new album?

I actually haven't listened yet.
Okay, I mean, I've checked that out because, well, of course, yeah, it's cool.
I mean they're getting back to some heavy stuff, which I enjoyed, I love.
Did you hear that collaboration they did with Aurora? It was "Limousine."
I've checked the song—I mean I can't say that I remember the song exactly, yeah, but I think so.
It was an interesting take. They got so—they're super productive. You can't just keep track on everything they release.

Have you seen them live?

Yes.

Cool, you're so, so happy!

Yeah, it was amazing. Seriously, like one of the best shows I've ever been to.

Q6: What genres of music do you listen to besides metal?

Any other music besides metal?
Um, I love...
That's a good question. Just kind of alt indie, whatever you'd consider Balance and Composure. They're definitely not, like, any kind of metal like that; it's just, like, nice melodies I like.
Also, you know, some, like, club, Charli XCX kind of electronic music, stuff like that, DJ music. But, I mean, mostly I stay in the metal.


Additional Topic: Women in Metal


Q5c: Why are there not that many women or girls in metal, in your view?

Well, if we want to get into the... I mean, your opinion! I'm sorry, in your opinion, in your view—
I think women, from a societal perspective, are discouraged from having a prominent, loud voice a lot of the time. Women are expected to kind of be quiet, pretty, cute.
But metal is such an in-your-face, like, dynamic genre, so to—you know, it's just not common for women to be in that area.
And also, it's a little bit harder to kind of tap into that area of vocals as a woman. Like, you can hear I'm about a tenor in women's—I have a deeper voice as a woman. Not a lot of women, you know, sit that low vocally, so it's a little harder to kind of get real low into that. So an example, like Poppy—she has a higher pitched voice, she tends to do higher vocals.
But I think it's a mix of those two things.

Q5d: Do you know many of your female friends that are into metal (statistics)?

I think about 30 percent of women, in my, you know, kind of circle of people, like or are even involved in that kind of music. Most—it's about 70 percent men, I'd even maybe push that to maybe 80 percent men and 20 percent women, just—yeah.


Musical Background


Q7: Do you play any musical instruments?

Oh, so right now I'm actually kind of playing around with drums. I've always wanted to learn that. I'm also playing with bass as well.
But the only instrument that I know how to actually play well is trumpet. I played trumpet in high school.

Q7a: That probably also helps (for vocals)?

Yes, no, I'm glad you say that actually, because that is one of the things that I attribute my ability to do vocals.
That's like the number one thing that I attribute to it, because, like, you have to have so much force and power to be able to play trumpet. It's a lot of diaphragm work, so—and control. So like, keeping everything tight here—it's the same, you know, technique to do vocals for me as it is to do trumpet, so that's where all my power comes from.

Q8: Do you write music?

I have begun to recently, because I'm in a band locally, about two hours from here.
We're just now kind of playing with the idea of, like, writing our own music, so we've been tapping into that. But I've never written, like, an actual full song yet.

Q8a: What do you play with your band?

So right now, we're kind of, you know, playing it safe with grunge. Yeah, mostly grunge. I'm trying to get into more, like, metalcore, hardcore stuff.

Q8b: Can we talk a little bit about your band? How many years with them?

It's honestly been only since, I think, August.
So we're still getting kind of, you know, feeling each other out as far as, like, what our musical strengths are, what our weaknesses are, and how they can all blend together to create something.

Q8c: What is the band's name?

Robin's Fire.

Q12: How often do you perform live?

Yes, actually, we just did a live show recently at a local bar called Friends on the Hill in Warner Robins.
They're a good, like, alternative, hardcore scene—like bar venue to play at.
But yeah, we just did that. It was a good show. It was very good.

Q13: Have you recorded anything with your current band?

No, we have not recorded. We're actually in the process of writing and recording our first song called "Leech," but it's nowhere near finished. We're still, you know, picking out the words, deciding what layers and, you know, melody and such that we want. So that's still very fresh in the works.

Q11: Have you been in other bands before?

No, I wish. Yeah, no, this is my first official band I've been in.

Q9: Do you have any formal musical education?

Other than my experience with trumpet between middle and high school—well, actually, college as well, because I did band in college. So I guess between the ages of 10 to 21, I was, you know, doing trumpet in bands.

Q9a: Where did you learn trumpet?

It was a mixture of at home and at school. So I'd previously been playing around with it at home with my dad, because, like I said, he was also a very musical person.
And so he played trumpet, and I'd taken an interest in it, so I started playing around with it.
Then I got to middle school and, you know, tried out, and that was what we decided to put me on as far as instruments go, so yeah.
There is some formal education—yeah, a little bit, yeah.


Vocal Training and Technique


Q11: How long have you been active as a metal vocalist?

So I have been doing vocals in this genre for about, I believe, four years now. I started officially when I was—I think I can say five, actually, because I was 21 when I started. I'm 26 now. So five years.

Q12: How did you learn those extreme vocal techniques?

Well, it's kind of complicated, because growing up I've always had a very loud, like, projectable voice, if that makes sense. I've always had an ability to yell really loud. That might sound silly, but I have a good projection because—like I said, my experience with trumpet—but I've always been able to yell pretty well. So I started just, like, you know, yelling in my car along to my favorite music, because I wanted to be able to sing along to it. And, you know, I just realized over time that the kind of vocals that I'm listening to in this music—it's very similar to the yelling that I already kind of know how to do. It was just starting there and then just kind of creating more distortion.

Q13: Have you taken any vocal lessons?

Lessons, no; I was never able to take lessons. I started to at my college, but then literally the first lesson that I had was interrupted by the COVID announcement—literally, we'd gotten the announcement as we were in our first lesson, that basically our school was shutting down for a while. So that's unfortunate.
We thought it was gonna be like two weeks, and definitely wasn't. That became two years.

Q14: Do you follow any vocal exercises or routines to protect your voice?

Yeah, so I don't drink a lot of soda. I don't drink soda at all. I really only drink water (room temp—cold isn't very good for the vocals, for the vocal cords). It's very constricting with vocals. You want to have a relaxed throat, you know what I mean?
So I also do regular stretches, like of the neck, because this area needs to be relaxed and stretched out. If it's tight, it's not going to be the best that it can be. So stretching is part of the routine of warming up as well. It's like even when I'm not actively warming up for, you know, vocal practice or a session with my band, it's just good to do normally.

Q16: Have you ever had any health issues related to vocals?

No, I've never had any voice issues—vocal issues.


Vocal Style


Q17: How would you describe your vocal style?

So, I do mostly false cords. I believe I've tapped into, like, the fry as well. Those are generally thought to be, like, higher range of vocals. I tap into that every now and then, but I'm not as comfortable with it as I am my false cords, which puts me in about a mid to even low range.

Q19: Which vocal techniques do you use most frequently?

False cord, yeah.

Q20: Do you notice any differences in your vocal approach between recording and live shows?

Um... if there's one distinction that I had to make between being in practice or studio versus being live on stage—I wasn't able to hear myself as much on stage as I would in practice or in the studio. So I have had to project my singing voice more, especially in the lower range, because lower ranges (and generally female vocals) it's a little harder to project. So I had to do a little bit something that I wasn't prepared for on stage, if that makes sense. But in the studio, I can hear just fine. On stage, it was just a little bit different—had to adapt, and try to go up the next octave if that makes sense.


Perception of Extreme Vocals


Q22: Is intelligibility an important goal for you as a vocalist?

It's a long word! Is it important to be intelligible—like being able to enunciate so that people can understand? Yeah, I mean, I think so, if I'm being honest. Like I said earlier, I like all genres of metal, modern metal. But if I can't really—like it's so low I can't really understand it, I'm a little less drawn to it, but I still enjoy it. When I hear enunciation, I'm more drawn to it, you know what I mean?

Q25: What about melody in screaming and growling? Is there melody—can there be melody?

I believe yes. I believe there definitely can be, depending on what subgenre you're talking about. Like, metalcore gives a lot of way for melody. And being—I guess you could consider me classically trained in some (with trumpet and stuff), I love melody. So I think those two can definitely coexist.
Of course, like, changing your pitch with your metal vocals, you can add some in there. I think a great example of that would be Landon Tours from The Plot In You. He is really good at mixing some actual melody in his voice with his, like, hard vocals, and it evokes a very strong emotional element to it.
I've tried that and, you know, it's good here and there for me personally, but it actually kind of hurts a little bit when you do that. So, I think there is obviously a technique that you can get away with it, but in short: yes, you can add melody to vocals, but it's not something I've gotten comfortable with yet.

Q27: What about rhythm—is there rhythm in extreme vocals?

I'm sorry—the rhythm; is it like a rhythm in extreme vocals? I think so— I mean, is it important? Yeah—because essentially, most hard vocals are going to be nothing but rhythm, you know what I mean? Because there's not a lot of melodic tone to go off of, it's kind of only rhythm and that hard distortion. Does that make sense?