25 y.o., Male


Musical Taste


Q3: How did you get into music?

Oh, boy. Well, my dad liked music a lot and would always be playing music in the car and would always be blasting music from the stereo growing up. Like in the morning, he'd make us breakfast and we'd be playing a whole variety of stuff from Van Halen and Guns N' Roses and Linkin Park all the way to Gwen Stefani and female artists who I don't even remember their name. But I could think of some of the songs, like that one song "Venus" and "Two of Hearts," just a whole bunch of 80s stuff. He really kind of set it on—he's not a musician himself. But he'd be playing music all the time. And that kind of instilled this love and appreciation of a bunch of different genres of music into my sister and I. And then my sister kind of found heavier music before me and put me onto a lot of artists like Neck Deep, Architects, Every Time I Die. Brand New was in there, but you don't want to mention Brand New. Who else? Like everybody, like Warped Tour, all that.

Guitar Hero was another huge influence. That was something our cousins who live in New York brought down and the whole family took turns playing. And then we got Guitar Hero 3, put a song to all these different bands. And some of the bands, you only know that song, whatever song's on the game, then it takes you five years or 10 years into your life to be like, oh, they have an entire discography waiting to be explored, you know? So that was a thing. Because my sister was better than me, Guitar Hero, during the childhood ages and I wanted to beat her. So I'm like, OK, I'm going to learn guitar and it's going to make me better at Guitar Hero. And there's like no correlation.

So I started taking guitar lessons, never practiced. Start, well, joined a band in eighth grade, picked up the guitar again, and then was kind of playing all the time since then. And then, yeah, so family, family and other cultural things got me into music and heavy music.

Q4: What genres of music do you listen to besides metal?

Much rap? Yeah, honestly, I know it's a bit of a cliché, but I mean a little bit of everything. I was taking voice lessons last year. I was in a band in college and it wasn't meant to be. And one of the things I heard frequently from all the bandmates was, "You need voice lessons." And I was like, all right. Then I finally took them. And every voice teacher I've ever had, when it comes to distorted vocals, they're like, "No. You're going to damage your voice. There's no right way to do that," because they're all classically trained, musical theater trained. I got my degree in theater at Florida State. So musical theater—another big thing that's part of the background and the identity.

Country was always a cliché until I heard a few country songs. And I was like, oh, sometimes there's a mood for Jason Aldean. Sometimes Tim McGraw is fine to fall asleep to.

I've been trying to get another band in Atlanta going. It's been a bit of a slow-moving wheel because we all have a bunch of different things and passions going on, and I want to just release music. So I've been kind of pursuing a solo act. On this solo EP I've been working on since February, there's a couple of emo tracks. There's one thing that I want to say sounds country, but I've heard it described more "Western," but there's more country influence on it. There's one thing that's a little bit rhyming, sublime—like, "Lately I've been feeling like the blackest sheep. Lately I've been feeling like the odd one out." That type of vibe on it. And yeah, like pop, I feel like pop influences everybody in some form or fashion, but it's not one of my favorite things. And just being surrounded by theater and classically trained voice people, opera is going to influence you, whether you like it or not. Because I mean, even this stuff we're doing, it's all vowel shapes and sounds.


Musical Background


Q7: Do you play any musical instruments?
You mentioned that you should play guitar, too. Any other instruments?

Oh, boy. Last time I answered that question, someone ignored that I played guitar and was supposed to help me play guitar. And then I can play bass. Bass, that's pretty much it. I can't really hold a show on any other instrument unless I'm doing one thing. If you want a snare on quarter notes, sure, then I'm a drummer. But I played tuba in middle school, don't remember how to play no tuba. So yeah.

Q8: Do you write music?

Yeah.

Q10: Are you currently a member of a band? If so, what is the name of the band and how long have you been part of it?

I'm trying to get another band in Atlanta going; the band I'm trying to get together right now is called Learn When.

Q11: Have you been in other bands before? If so, how many and for how long?
How many bands have you played in?

Oh, gosh, I wrote that list at a point in time and I thought it was over 10. But there was like my solo act because I performed music—I performed like punk and metal music alone before. I did this thing in my freshman and sophomore year before I had the college band: I would get like a YouTube playlist of a bunch of songs that I liked and I would play them as background music through my amplifier and I would play guitar and I took them to this fountain called the Westcott Fountain at Florida State. I would just not really be a busker. I made a performance at it, but I would have all my friends go. But there was one real band in eighth grade that played shows and sometimes were two people. One time it was four people. I count that as like different groups. There was a lot of groups that got together to practice and never played a show, so that probably makes the list even longer. There was Redrawn, which was the big band for four years in college and out of college. The band I'm trying to get together right now is called Learn When. So that would be five. I filled in once—that doesn't really count as like a band that I was in. So, yeah.

Q12: How often do you perform live?
Do you often do live shows?

Music? Yeah, when I was on a band. It's funny you say that because my producer for my solo project—we actually, I guess you could call it busking—we played music under the belt line or on the belt line today by the old fourth ward skate park. Yeah, it was his idea... I'm trying to play more live shows, but I'm also—you know, I told you I studied theater. I'm also an actor. I don't know how much you know about the acting industry, but I've had 40, 46 as of today. I have a few auditions to do, 46 auditions in 2025 alone, which is good for me. So I've been busy with that. I was doing comedy in Tallahassee. I performed stand up once since I moved to Atlanta. And right now in this phase of my life at 25, I'm like, OK, I have all these pursuits. They're more than hobbies. They're more than interests. They're part of my life. They're part of my identity. I want to make money from it. I want to be known for doing each of these things. Because when I went in college, I was known as a comedian. I was known as an actor. I was known as a metal musician, you know—Pete, that was Jerry. So now I'm like, OK, how do I just make the persona for myself in the real world, you know. So that's kind of where I'm at when it comes to the music.

Q14: Do you notice any differences between live shows and recording songs?
Do you notice any differences between live shows and recording songs? In terms of the performance? In terms of the vocals and your approach to it?

I mean, there innately is differences, you know, at a live show with a crowd or even—I mean, there was like no crowd on the Beltline—there was just swarms of people passing by, right. There's an energy. And I notice, you know, when I'm practicing, when I'm rehearsing, or, you know, you're just playing by yourself, you're making a bunch of mistakes. You're like, all right, either play the song again, play the part again, or just keep going. But when we're playing on the Beltline today, I'm like, I'm not looking down at my guitar and I'm just like locked in like I'm playing the song. Sure, I made a couple of mistakes, but a lot less than when rehearsing. And I'm like, that's interesting.

In terms of recording, I'm trying to think back to when I was recording music in my college band. Now it's like I have voice lessons, so I learn techniques or things are a lot different. If you listen to any of the college band tracks, everything sounds like shit, pardon my French, you know, because we were doing it all ourselves. We didn't know what we were doing. Now you get older, you meet people who have more experience with Reaper or whatever DAW systems. And now me as a musician and a vocalist, it's like, OK, I've learned what I'm doing now. I just want to go. And I'm also trying to do that with all the other pursuits at the same time. And thus everything is a slow moving wheel until it's not.


Vocal Training and Technique


Q11: How long have you been active as a singer of extreme metal?

Oh, great question. Let's put it at like ninth grade, I think. I mean, because, of course, you hear this shit and you're like, oh, I could do that. Like, let me, you know. But then, you know, you watch a how to pig squeal video on YouTube and you're like, oh, you know, I can. I can't. You can't, can't do that. Not the voice type for it, the streets. I mean, I didn't start adding it to my own music until the college band. And even then, again, listening to the recordings, I'm like, I didn't know what I was doing. It's too weak and not putting any diaphragm behind it or anything. And taking actual music lessons helps a lot with that, even though the teachers terrified.

Q13: Do you have any formal musical education?
Right now you mentioned lesson that you're taking and some other classes. Anything else?

Yeah, I haven't had much and I've been surrounded by a lot of people who—it's like that was their four year degree, their six year degree, their everything. And sometimes they're not that fun to be around.
Why? Because they're elitist and they know more than you and they can do more than you and you both know it. Oh, I would love to learn from them. But they have such a—lot of them, pardon me, generally speaking, have such a stick up their ass that they don't know their power in being able to transfer their education to you. Whoever their pedagogy is, they're just—generally speaking, again—they kind of have this energy that it's like you're either going to be surrounded by people who are on your level or you need to separate yourself from the people who aren't. You need to figure out how they can serve you and just make money from them. And as somebody outside of formal music education, it leads with guitar—well, I took like an intermediate and advanced guitar class at Florida State. I learned some scales, I learned how to play in key. It wasn't as crazy. We weren't really learning jazz theory and like passing chords and substitution. We weren't doing any of that. But somebody told me when I was in high school who was in a professional touring band was, like, you need to play music with people who are better than you. So when I joined my college band and half the members were college of music educated people, I was like, OK. Sometimes they were patient but other times not so patient. And whenever they did their most technical stuff, you'd be blown away and you're like, oh, let's turn that into an actual song. They would kind of like stick up their noses and just be like, no, because like if you can't play it now, you're never going to learn it. So I don't trust you to lock into the 5/4 meter. So we're just not going to waste our time. And I'm like, well, that sucks. I don't want to turn this into all of my gripe with them. But if you are that type of virtuoso, I think, and when you're trying to join a band, you need to have an openness to be able to teach people, teach your bandmates, because it's probably how the best bands do it... Ideally, that's how I would like things to be.

Q18: Have you ever had any health related issues with your voice?

It's funny—no. But they always thought something was wrong because, oh, you know, you asked me when I started doing the extreme vocal technique. And I have this distinct memory when I was in kindergarten, of the guidance counselor coming into the room during nap time and was like, Jerry, I'm like, OK. And she walked me to the playground, the recess playground. No one's there. She sat me down because guidance counselors will always like isolate you and they want to tell you something important. And she was like, "You may need speech therapy or you may need something because you make these animated noises with your voice and we're worried you're clashing them together and you could get vocal damage from that." So I was like, oh. They were like, try not to try to speak from the front of your face, which is nothing like acting says—you want to point and speak from the front of your face so you're heard in a higher timbre and we can understand you better. I remember that and then nothing kind of came of it. And then I don't know if I was sick—I went to an ENT, an ear, nose, and throat doctor, another time either in middle school or high school. They stuck a thing up my nose and it was a little camera and they viewed my vocal cords, I think maybe because I was sick for a long time. And they're like, we don't know if it's bronchitis, strep throat, we don't know what it is. We just need to look at your vocal cords. And they're like, no, they're perfectly fine. They're a little bit irritated, but they're fine. So thankfully, that's not what—but like there's been no issues.

And with all of my teaching, that's like, oh, you can't do that because that's not like—unless you're singing opera, unless you're singing classical voice, you're not singing voice, you're hurting yourself. I don't want to hurt myself, and every professional metal vocalist is like, "There's technique to do it so you're not hurting yourself." So you're fine. And I like to think I'm doing it the right way, but I'm trying to take care of myself. I think I'm engaging my false vocal cords. I mean, I think that's what gets the distorted sound. There's also ricocheting off the soft palate and a bunch of other things. Like I said, I've learned how to do some growling. My highs are kind of mids, they're not really highs. I would like to track down that metal voice teacher, because she could probably unlock me even more than I already am, you know.

Q19: Do you do anything to protect your voice or routine?

I have a—with that voice teacher from Tallahassee, she gave me an eight-minute baritone warm up. And that's what I do whenever I'm going to go to a performance, even if it's something acting or I'm doing a lot of talking. I did it before the belt line, out busking hour. I did it before I came here again. May even do it again before we go in there. I don't know. People say, tea, I brought my water bottle to fill up. Yeah, no, hot stuff and honey. People are right, it works. But I'm not too—I don't have a routine wrapped around any of those things. Those are just like if I'm in pain, it's like, OK, if I need to go on vocal rest, like I know I have these things, you know.


Vocal Style


Q20: How would you describe your vocal style?

I thought of this, like, Randy Blythe, Lamb of God, he is a very specific—like, "this is a motherfucking invitation," like that's something. And I don't know if you know the band I Killed the Prom Queen. They're another metalcore band where it's predominantly growling and then, like, a very specific type of high, but that doesn't even sound like a high. That's the stuff—I'm like, OK, I can mimic this, but ultimately it's a lower register, you know. And it's just—it's just where my voice sits, you know, it's my range, and not much you can do about that one.

Perception of Extreme Vocals

Q22: Is intelligibility (being understood) important to you in extreme metal?

To an extent, some people are never going to absorb lyrics and they're there for the beat in any music. Some people—I think the band Every Time I Die, before they broke up, really soared because of Keith Buckley's lyricism. Some of my mute—well, I had a bit of writer's block at moments because I wanted to push such profound messaging, and I'm like, I don't know how to say it and not sound like just an idiot or stupid or something I don't want to sound like.

With all the art that I do—like, there's so many different mediums, and my kind of underlying philosophy is a little bit of it—I don't know how much you're familiar with the AA and the NA kind of underlying ethos: it's just service for people. Like, you're not compensating me for this. OK, I don't care. We have a shared interest in this music; you need people for your study; I'm providing my voice to you—like, it's fun for me, you need it for a litany of reasons. There's so many transactional people in the world, and I think they're some of the worst people, but not even just that. I think that type of lifestyle can lead itself to addiction and pain and a bunch of other things that all stem from ego.

And I'm just like, when you live a life where your definition of love is unmitigated, unadulterated, undying service for your fellows, which is everyone around you ("but you're around me, Alexi"), like, that is what will give you the most fulfilling life, and that's what's going to lead to the longevity of the human race. Everything else is fucking noise, pardon my French again, and comes from obsession with yourself or image or being perceived or all these other things. So that's something that I put in the metal music; I put in the solo music; I tried really hard to put it into comedy, and that's the hardest thing to do. Acting—you know, when you're writing film, which I do write, it's another thing I put into it.

Like I've just decided, because I thought everything I just told you, I'm like, oh, I have to make that the lyric in the climactic song on the album; that has to be the main idea in the movie or the main idea in the comedy special. I'm like, no, drop it. Say it everywhere all the time. Put it at the climax of the—in the final song of the metal album. Just put it everywhere. Reiterate it, reiterate it, apply it to every situation—that's my thing. Because, again, not everyone listens to the lyrics. But that person who loves the breakdown but doesn't know what the hell you're screaming may have watched a comedy special and was like, "Oh, my God, it was so funny. But I got the service thing, I got the bit." So that's the thing that I'm trying to carry.

Q23–Q26: Melody and rhythm in extreme vocals (and intelligibility)

We've got a couple more words—oh, sorry, a couple more questions, and I think we can just combine them into one.

Melody and rhythm in extreme metal: how important are they, and whether or not they can actually help the intelligibility?

Oh, yeah. Well, it's interesting because I can kind of tie it to instrumental as well, and I guess composition of djent songs. Like, a lot of djent songs, you're just playing the open fret. I don't know if you play. You said you were in a band, so I bet you get it. You know, and even this guitar teacher in the advanced class at FSU, he's like the future of writing music, or at least writing this metal music, it's not based off the melody, it's based off the rhythm. Because everybody's song—everybody's playing open fret when whatever drops the tuning, they have—that was the ostinato, the repeated rhythmic phrase, you know. And even with some of these metal vocalists, like I'm thinking of the guy from Archspire, it's the same note, isn't it? But he's finding the rhythmic displacement of how to deliver each line, you know.

So you can write an entire discography based off of that principle, just within the realm of—under the umbrella of rhythm. If you just keep switching up the rhythm, but you have your tone, OK, cool. The second you add melody—oh, now it's more fun. Because it's amazing how Archspire, just for an example of a progressive deathcore band, like, the vocalist can carry them. But really, it's—I forgot his one name, it's like Dave, I forget the guitarist's name—but the instrumentals are also like, it all comes together.

But I'm trying to think of somebody that that really does the melody well. All That Remains, kind of—I feel like they have a few distinct vocal stylings; I don't know how much they shake it up. Killswitch Engage—I don't know who the current lineup is; I don't know if they have multiple vocalists still. Think of Architects when it comes to—they're getting more... Yes, Sam Carter! That's one of those dudes. And it's funny, because I saw him on the database and he's a tenor. I'm like, well, I can't do any of Sam Carter's old stuff 'cause he's out of my range.

But I—like I grew up—him and watching him develop, you know, and now he's in all the music they're dropping, these new albums he's dropping, and he used to just—oh! You know, that was his thing. And it makes the music more diverse, there's more happening, which I think consensus is going to be—that's just going to equate more intelligibility.

I think the more that's going on, people are like, "Oh, this is intelligent." But if you can do less—if you really make the phrase "less is more" true with instrumentation or vocal performance, I think that's really—people are really going to love that. Because take Polyphia—they're going batshit every song, right? But there's prog music that's really, really great and it's still technical and it has its moments, but it'll breathe more. It's not like the whole song. And I don't want to call Polyphia "riff salad," they're better than that. But again, they're going crazy the entire time.

So I don't know. I think some people dedicate themselves to being, you know, the next Tim Henson, the next Tosin Abasi, where it's crazy the entire time. Even vocalists, there's people who are like, OK, can I be like Franz from Attila, and how can I stretch—how many gimmicks with the voice can you put on the same song? I don't even want to say "gimmick." How many techniques can you put in the same song? And I think that's the point that I was trying to get to—is sometimes more isn't more intelligibility if it feels like a gimmick. If you can make it musical, if you can make the transitions, if you can round everything out to a mass appeal form of excellency, then it's like, OK, you did it.

But if you're just switching for the sake of switching, like some... OK, I can talk about this because let's talk about "Mordecai" by Between the Buried and Me. Some people love that song. I listen to that song and I think it's failing at this concept. I don't think that's a more-is-more-intelligible type of thing because—it's like—and some people disagree. I'm saying it's like an actual podcast like this is going to go anywhere. But I just don't think they get away with the transitions—to me it feels like I'm listening to three songs crammed into one. You know, but I mean, I kind of still feel like it's—I mean, I enjoy those parts, you know, kind of like in particular. But yeah, it would be nice to have something that unites them more. I mean, they do some kind of art—they repeat, right? But too different, like, it took me...

I love the Callous Daoboys nowadays, they just dropped a new album, they were doing a show, they are doing a show today. 