18 y.o., Male
 

Musical Taste


Q3: How did you get into music?

Just listened to music on my mom's iPod as a kid.

What sort of music?

All kinds, like from hip-hop to metal. The first metal artist I listened to was Cannibal Corpse.

Have you seen them live?

No.

Q4: What inspires you in metal music?

I just like the technique and how over-the-top it can be. It really challenges my musicality.

Q5: Subgenres of metal you particularly like and why?

Progressive death. Yeah, I like the—I love progressive music in general, and especially like the extremism of the vocals and the guitar and how cool it can be sometimes.

Could you name some bands?

Opeth, Meshuggah I guess we count, Dream Theater (that's not really death though, it's progressive), Tool's progressive stuff.

Why do you enjoy progressive music?

It takes music to its top and combines all styles. I like that.


Musical Background


Q7: Do you play any musical instruments?

I play guitar, bass and drums.

Q8: Are you in a band?

No.

Q9: Have you been in a band before?

Yeah, I have. It's not my style. It was like a blues group, so...

Q10: Would you want to start or join a band?

Yeah, just later when I find people I can... I feel are on my level.

Q11: Do you have any formal musical education?

No.

Any maybe classes?

Yeah, classes in high school and stuff.

Can you tell me a little bit about those classes?

Well, I was in chorus and band, and I took chorus for one year and I didn't like the teacher.
But in band I learned like music theory and I played the drums in the band. Percussion—section leader.
I love drums. It's my favorite instrument.

Q12: Do you write music?

No, not really. I'll get a melody in my head and be like, I wonder how I can do that, and just forget it.


Musical Activity


Q13: Do you perform live? Do you do live shows?

Sometimes.

How often?

Like twice a year. Not often.

Q14: How long have you been active as a singer of extreme metal?

I've been practicing for about two, three years.

Q15: How did you learn extreme vocals?

A lot of videos and trying to figure out what they're saying. But when I first figured it out, it was in high school and I was just like driving down the road, I was like, finally let out a scream—that, you know, I'm trying to practice and I hit it just right and I was like, oh, it's like down here, it's not in my vocal cords. I finally figured out what everybody in those videos were saying, that it's like more in your chest and less as an actual scream.

What about growls? How did you learn those?

I just kind of took that technique and messed with trying to get it lower and lower. Yeah.


Vocal Training and Technique


Q16: How would you describe your vocal style?

Death. Growls, screams, stuff like that.

Q17: Have you had any issues with your voice because of screaming/growling?

Well, when I first started trying to figure it all out, it's just, I'd do it and then my voice had hurt and I was like, I didn't know if I was doing it right. And then finally it was just like, oh, it's supposed to be like that, like my voice connected to the sound, right? And that's what I'm like with a lot of like drumming and guitar—you have to play it till you feel it right. And now it's like if I go a little over the top, maybe I'll feel a little hurt in my cords, but nothing bad.


Q18: Do you have any routines like to maintain your voice, to protect it maybe?

No, not really.

Like honey?

I'll drink like maybe a glass of milk or yeah.

Q19: Have you ever recorded anything in the studio?

Yeah. Okay, that's easy and fun.


Perception of Extreme Vocals


Q20: Is it important for you to be understood with what lyrics you're screaming or growling?

Well, when I hear metal vocals and I liked it at first, and over time I was like, why do I like it?
And I found out that it's like the vocals is like another instrument in the group except it—it can say something, you know. When you look at the lyrics, it's like—it's like if a guitar could speak to you, tell you what message the thing. And people who listen to metal vocals, they don't really think of a melody most of the time, maybe in a couple of genres, but with growls and screams, it's more of a like a distorted story, guitar and stuff like that.

Q21: You mentioned melody—do you think there is or can be melody in screaming/growling?

Oh, definitely.

Q22: Do you, when you use those techniques, do anything to be more understood? To articulate?

Actually, like the word more—you just go ahead and rara... Oh, like in a course through middle school and high school, the teacher would always be like, pronounce your G's and make sure you get your S's just like this. So whenever I'm screaming and it's like—I like these, you know, these words—I'll enunciate and articulate the starting consonants and vowels.

Q23: What about rhythm in extreme vocals—how important is it, can it help intelligibility?

I think sometimes, but some vocalists I think you can drag and people wouldn't care a whole lot.
But yeah, I like rhythm for vocals.