23 y.o., Male


Musical Taste


Q3: How did you get into music?

Um, honestly, skateboarding. Skateboarding back in like 2014, 2013, and then just started like listening to emo music with my friends and started to just get heavier and heavier over time. First band, first concert ever was Slipknot, Lamb of God, Bullet For My Valentine, and Motionless In White. So, it's a good first concert.

Q3a: Heavy music right away?

Well, they started with, like, Green Day—Green Day and then like I got into like emo stuff like Bullet For My Valentine and like Motionless and White. But Ghost was in the beginning, Ghost BC and King 810 and Slipknot and like all that stuff, so you like got heavy pretty quickly. At first, I was more into like the metalcore-y stuff with like singing and screaming, you know.

Q4: Any other subgenres of metal that you like?

Oh, yeah. I mean, I like grew up with rock music just like hearing it on the radio and stuff, so I like a lot of rock. I like... I'm in a deathcore band and a metalcore band, so I like deathcore. I got into slam for a little bit. I like death metal. I like a lot of everything, you know. Hardcore is fun, too. Lot of everything. It just really depends—if I see the band live, then I really like it. But like I'd say my main stuff that I like is emo music, like My Chemical Romance and just deep cut emo, Asking Alexandria, Falling In Reverse, and then like, you know, I also just like a lot of heavy stuff too.

Q4a: And why emo?

I don't—probably 'cause I just used to be super emo when I was a kid. I had the black hair and everything. I was just into it. I don't know why, I was just attracted to it.

Q4b: And why deathcore?

Um, it's fun to play live. It's fun to be—to scream like deathcore vocalist.

Q6: Any other kind of music besides metal that you like?

Oh, yeah, I listen to a lot of pop, hip-hop, hyperpop. It's really whatever, like whatever I think is cool. If I like the song that's like a popular song, I'll listen to it, but like not necessarily super into any genre. But by means, I listen to just like a lot of stuff.


Musical Background


Q7: Do you play instruments?

Yeah, I play guitar. I was actually a guitar player first in my band and then I became the vocalist.

Acoustic or electric?

Eight strings.

Any other instruments?

I can write drums, I can play bass, but I'm mainly just a guitar player. But I like to do songwriting stuff.

Q8: Do you write music?

Yeah, like with my band Torn Soul, I'm the primary songwriter for that and I wrote a lot of the instrumentals as well as like the drums and bass parts and stuff. And then my other guitar player Cameron, he'll do stuff—same with Ian, my bassist. With my band I'm currently more active in, Actus Reyes, I'm the vocalist only, but I also like—I write stuff at home in my home studio on guitar stuff and we're still, since I just joined the band like a couple months ago, now we're still like writing new stuff with me. So, yeah, I do take a big hand in like the instrumental writing of things.

Q10: How long have you been in your current band and overall band experience? How long have you been in your current band Actus Reus? What is your overall band experience in terms of years?

I've been in the band for like two months, but I've been knowing the guys for, like, since 2018, so however many years that is now. And then, you know, I've played with them for a little over a year now, but I'm officially their vocalist as of like two months ago. Honestly, I started my first band in 2017 and then my second one in 2018. That's pretty much it. I've been playing guitar since maybe 2012, 2013, something like that, but I started my band in 2017. It's the first band I ever started.

Q11: Do you have any sort of formal musical education?

No, I'm self-taught. I'm pretty self-taught for everything. I've never even—like, I've taken like a couple guitar lessons through like online guitar players that I like, but I've never really stuck with lessons. I can read tabs, I used to be able to read sheet music a little bit—but no, not formal.
Just like to go with what sounds good.

Q11a: Any vocal lessons you’ve taken?

I've never taken vocal lessons.

Q12: Do you often perform live?

Yes, yes. I've been performing live since 2018. I played a show two days ago.

Average—how many shows a month?

Probably like, honestly, probably like two or more. With Actus, like, I know we've got two this month and next month I think we got like five or six, and then we try to travel in the Southeast, and we're going up to Ohio and New Orleans. On average, like two to five depending on where we're playing.


Vocal Training and Technique


Q13: How long have you been active as a metal vocalist?

Honestly, probably active I would say since 2023, like is when I started doing more just like straight metal—so when I became the vocalist of my band Torn Soul. Since the end—like towards the end of 2023, that's when I really started being active. I was in bands before that, like a rock/hard rock grungy thing, but we only played one live show and recorded an album—so it wasn't super active. But yeah, I'd say like actively, 2023 is when I started playing shows as a deathcore vocalist.

Q14: Have you recorded anything at a studio before?

Oh, yeah. I'm knowledgeable about a studio. I've been recording in a studio with Torn Soul since 2020, like the similar setup.

And you also mentioned home studio?

Yeah, I got my own home studio. It's just like a little setup.

Q15: How different is your approach to vocals (studio/live)?

It's not too different. I do the same thing. I practice stamina a lot, because playing live, jumping around and stuff, you have to be good at stamina, and my vocals are very loud and take a lot of power. The only difference I would say is that I'm just jumping around more, but I'm doing the same techniques. I practice breath control a lot. In the studio, you don't really have to practice breath control too much because you're standing still, but I'd say they sound about the same—I'm doing the same techniques.

Q16: Do you use any vocal warm-ups or exercise?

Yeah, so like I do, to warm up my vocals, like 30 minutes before a show I just do, like, actual physical working out—like I'll do push-ups and stuff, and then with the vocal cords itself, that's to get my body warmed up and prepared, and then I'll just do chopped screams, just screaming out some random vowels or whatever, and then I'll do like this, like it's on YouTube, five-minute vocal warm-up—I'll just hum and do all this to get things moving, drink water, and then I just go. Sometimes I don't get to do that, sometimes I just do a little bit of the chopped screams on stage during soundcheck and I just go for it. As long as I can hear myself on stage, it's usually fine.

Q17: Have you ever had any health-related issues with your voice?

Oh, yeah. I mean, in like twenty—when I first starting to scream back in like 2020, 2019, 2020–21, when I was trying to figure out how to scream and sing and I was, like, yelling a lot, I didn't know what I was doing. And I was also drinking a lot at that time and probably not eating the best either, and I remember I would just get super light-headed when I would record in my house and just be like, oh my god, had to sit down—one time I just fell down because I just screamed and just saw fuzz and hit the ground, but then I got back up. But then since then that hasn't really happened. I've gotten better at technique and breath control.

Q18: How did you learn extreme vocal techniques?

Just trying to do it—like, I remember what really made me click is like trying to sound like Alex Terrible from Slaughter To Prevail, and that's what made it click. I kind of figured out how he does his loud, deep screams and that's what I did.


Vocal Style


Q19: How would you describe your vocal style?

Loud. Loud. I mainly do like a—I don't know, it's a blend between fry and false.
I've heard others describe it as like it sounds like I'm almost layering screams sometimes, like with my mid I can sound like I'm layering two different screams. So I'd describe it as like loud, big, and powerful is what I like to think—that's the goal, at least, to try and get it out there.

Q20: Could you list some vocal techniques that you are aware of?

Yeah, I know like fry and false cords. I don't really know how to like necessarily... I actually—I know how to trigger it, I know how to do different types, but I'm more so just like found my own in-between, you know, of both of that. I can do gutturals, I can do like more nasally high screams. That's kind of like where my range is, where I like to stick around, you know.

Q20a: It's quite often we hear some people describe those techniques as screaming or growling. What do you think of that?

Yeah, I just call it screaming. I haven't really thought about that too much. I know when I was first starting I heard a lot of people talk about it being growling or whatever, but I just call it screaming.

Q20b: You mentioned fry technique. Where would you put it, like if you had to choose—screaming or...?

Yeah, fry is fry screaming—it's just quieter, you know, fries are quieter. Growling is kind of quiet and like what I do is just super loud; I consider those like gutturals. I just call it screaming, you know.

So fry screaming and just screaming?

Yeah.

Q20c: How would you describe the difference to someone who doesn't know that?

I'd say, you know, fries are quieter, but at the end of the day they both sound similar on a microphone. Some are more gurgly, you know, some are deeper—like growling is more like death medley, gurgly; with fries you can move it around a lot more and get different tones, you know.

Q20d: What about the type of scream used in hardcore music?

Oh, so like that kind of yelly scream—I like those. That's just more, I feel like, just more like anger, kind of just letting your vocal crack a little bit—you’re yelling, and then you let it crack. That's more like more false-cord-y, I'd say, but yeah, I feel like that's more like just raw, kind of yelling and stuff.

Q21: Could you name some vocalists that influenced your vocal style?

Alex Terrible definitely did. With more of my like singing rock stuff, I'd say like Corey Taylor was a big influence early on. Ronnie Radke is a big influence. As far as heavier stuff go... you know, Meshuggah was a big influence, just the band as a whole for me. My Chemical Romance, Slipknot (I already said Corey Taylor), Bullet For My Valentine. But yeah, I'd say my main vocalists are probably like Ronnie Radke, Corey Taylor, Chris Motionless and Alex Terrible—the four that probably influenced me the most over time.


Perception of Extreme Vocals


Q22: Intelligibility—is it important for you to be understood?

Oh, yeah. Like, I mean, every word that I want to, like, that I say—like, I want to pronounce it. Like I want to still sound heavy but also pronounce all my words as best as I can. But then, like, you know, there’s some parts where they're not words and I just make noise, just for the heaviness of it—and that's fine, too. But I'd prefer to be able to pronounce things.

Q22a: In terms of intelligibility—which techniques help more?

Hardcore style, deathcore style, like the super guttural stuff—a lot of it, you can't tell what they're saying, you know. Like, you can use fry technique to make it more pronounced with what you're saying and, especially in hardcore and stuff, you can kind of understand what they're saying because they're practically just yelling, you know. But then like when it comes to growling, gutturals, or like death metal, deathcore stuff, it's like a lot of it's just like monster noises, or animal noises, this is what everybody talks about.

Q22b: When you listen to metal music, how much lyrics do you actually understand?

I mean, it really depends on how much I like the song, you know, like, a lot of deathcore stuff—if I don't really like the song I won't listen for the lyrics, but then like, you know, older Motionless in White, where I grew up with that and I like really liked the song, even though they were screaming, there was one time where I was like, oh, I don't know what they're saying, but now I listen to it—I can tell what they're saying. It's just like, over time, listening to that kind of music you just, especially knowing how to do it, you know what people are—you can hear their words, unless it's just like a deathcore song that's just making noise, you know.


Melody & Rhythm in Extreme Vocals


Q23: What do you think about melody in extreme vocals?

I think it's very important. I love melody. It's like one of the main things that, like, captivate people that listen to music. You can do it with extreme vocals, too. Like you think about layering in songs—that's pretty much like building a melody, you know. So I think it's very important, and I love melodic stuff.

Q23a: Is melody possible in gutturals, too?

I mean, in a way. Depending on like the tonal of your—because, like, no matter what you're doing, you're still hitting a note area, you know. Like if you're hitting a low and then you hit like a mid-low and they stack on top of each other a certain way, you can kind of layer that and make melody out of that, depending on where you move. It just depends on how the screams sound together, you know. So I think it's possible, it's just not as cohesive, you know.

Q24: Do you think melody in extreme vocals can improve intelligibility?

I mean, maybe, yeah—maybe in the way for me, like I said, it depends on how much I like the song to where I see the...so I can hear the words better—so like if you know, if there's a good melody, it's gonna get stuck in your people's heads and then you're gonna just like keep wondering what it is and you'll end up hearing it, you know, that's what I think.

Q25: What about rhythm in extreme vocals—how important is it?

Oh, yeah, rhythm's super important, because like, if you got a good rhythm, that's like what makes—you could have like really crappy lyrics and have a good rhythm and the song will blow up and it'll get—it'll be way cooler, you know. So rhythm's like one of the more important things, I'd say. And I'm big on good lyrics as well, but rhythm does kind of trump lyrics in this kind of music, I think.

