41 y.o., male

2. Musical Taste
Q3: How did you get into music?
Well, my grandfather was a professional musician. He was the—well, an upright bass player in the Stanford Philharmonic Orchestra. And he used to play the guitar and taught guitar lessons for, I mean, 50 years. He would just be at home playing and I'd sit and listen to him, so I think that was kind of my first exposure.
I didn't take lessons from him like I should have. And when he died, I had this overwhelming sense of guilt. So I had just joined the army—actually, right when I commissioned as an officer. I was at the officer basic course at Fort Leonard Wood and, being by myself with nothing else to do, I was like, "You know what? I'm gonna learn to play the guitar."
And I had been drumming since I was like 10 or 11, so like I had already been doing all that. But I decided to get into doing music for real when I was probably 24, I guess.
You know, I'd been in bands in high school, but none of them were very serious. And then at some point I was in the army and said, "You know what, I want to do this for real," and my first guitar arrived on Halloween. It was this cheap Les Paul. It arrived on Halloween and that same day I went to go see Dimmu Borgir and Danzig.

Q3a: "How did you get into metal?"
Yeah, so when I was really young, all I knew anything about was classical music. My mom got remarried and I had—I acquired two step-brothers, and one of them was...
He wasn't like a huge metalhead, but he was enough of one where he was listening to like Sepultura, Pantera. And I didn't really understand that at first, but then he played the Paranoid album and it was like "War Pigs" came on, and then "Paranoid," and then "Iron Man" on that album. That was what it took for it to click with me.
So once I heard that, I was like, "That is the type of music that I like."
Then it was a very short-order succession—of note, today is the 26th anniversary of the first Ozfest I ever went to, May 29th, 1999. Did Slipknot play there? I think so, yeah. I'm pretty sure Slipknot was there—their first big gig. Biohazard was there. I'm pretty sure it was Slayer, and maybe Rob Zombie too, and then the original Black Sabbath lineup played, like with Bill Ward even.
Yeah, what a fortuitous day to have that anniversary.
Must have been a great show.
No, it was—it was awesome. I'll never file live. I'll remember that for the rest of my days.

2a. Subgenres and Why
Q4: What subgenres of metal are you particularly drawn to? Why?
My—and I’m a pretty reasonably good drummer, but I always had very limited guitar skills. I am straight up a rhythm guitar player and I was doing vocals at the same time. And the only vocals—I mean, you can hear how raspy my voice is—the only vocals that I could execute well were death metal vocals, like old-school death metal vocals.
So because of the constraints on my ability, that was what I went into. That's not to disparage old-school death metal; there were amazing musicians there. But I definitely took the obituary approach, like the "caveman," you know, club somebody over the head approach, rather than the super...like, the Yngwie Malmsteen approach was not my schtick.

At some point, in me doing it, is when I really kind of started to listen to old-school death metal the most.
But I also really like black metal.
And I like the processed black metal, but I also really like the really grimy, it-was-recorded-in-a-garage, you know, in Groschlak, Norway—I like that kind of black metal too. Like Gehenna is probably my favorite black metal band.
But if you listen to The Ancient Void (which was the band that I was in the longest), we definitely were like old-school death metal with a flare of old black metal in it.
But then people heard a lot of Sabbath-y kind of grooves in it, too. I remember a guy came up to me and was like, "That's the first time I've ever heard a black metal band play Obituary and Black Sabbath," and I was like, "I'm not offended by that, I just wish I had more skill so I could have been able to lock into that."
Yeah, and then, as life went on, you know, I started school again to do my PhD and then I got picked up as a drummer in a couple different bands. Then we had a bunch of changes in our lineup in The Ancient Void, and then me and Spencer (who is the drummer, bassist at different points), we were just like, "You know what? We're both in other bands, let's focus on that." And then, when I got to "comps" in my PhD, I was like, "I don't have time for any of this."
So I kind of got out of music and then got picked up as a drummer in a ska band and I did that for a while.

Q4a: Main Influences / Favorites
I would say like King Diamond and Mercyful Fate, obviously. Black Sabbath, like kind of that old-school late 70s, early 80s; and then old-school death metal, like Obituary. I actually really like Godgott Grave.
When I was younger, the big bands at the time were like nu metal, but I liked Sepultura, Pantera more than I liked the real nu metal bands. I did like Biohazard though, I really liked Biohazard.
Then, kind of in a fringe metal area: Type O Negative is probably...probably became ultimately my favorite metal band, just because Peter Steele's ability to capture moods.

Are you familiar with Type O?
So, like, his ability to write a thrash metal song, or a very punky song—in the beginning, they had a lot of thrash elements left over from Carnivore, and at the end, they had a lot of very punky elements reminiscent of Danzig, and then in the middle just like this ultra-symphonic like doomy and then gothic, you know, kind of like a goth flair.
I don't know, his ability to capture his emotions, I really think was just on another level. And even when you can tell his bandmates would be like, "Hey, you know, this is not a typical music approach, what if we did this?" He'd be like, "No, we're gonna do it this way." I appreciated how dedicated to his own craft he was.
Sometimes that means I have to listen to a riff for 19 straight minutes, right? But that's okay—like, I'm okay with that.

(Gives explanation for depth of subgenre/artist choices.)

3. Musical Background
Q7: Which instruments do you play?
You mentioned some instruments that you play.
Yeah, you said you play guitar.
Yep, guitar, drums. Any other instruments?
Yeah, I played the violin for three years—was terrible at it.
I taught myself how to play the piano and I published a piano album so that I could learn how chords worked on the guitar.
Because prior to that I played the violin and the trumpet and then the drums, and I was not very good at mallet keyboard.
So I had a very flimsy understanding of chord theory, and I was like, "If I want to have, you know, real technical skill of some sort, I'm gonna have to learn how chord theory works. You're just gonna put together better songs that way." Or at least that's how my brain works.

So yeah, I picked up a couple other instruments. I really like the organ. Bach's my all-time favorite composer—all the things he did on the organ... That's my jam. If you listen to The Ancient Void, like, we got a lot of tracks that have organ in them.

Q8: Do you write music yourself?
Yes, I composed the piano album and published that in like 2013. And, yeah, so in The Ancient Void I wrote—hell, I wrote 99 percent of the parts. Like even bass lines, until Spencer joined the band, I wrote all the bass lines, wrote all the rhythm guitar lines, I did all the drumming. And I was recording in my basement while I was still in the army, so I had very limited resources, but I made it work as well as I could. When I got out of the army I picked up other musicians, but yeah, I mean, I wrote almost all the music.

Band Experience
Q10: Tell us more about your band experience.
I started being in bands—I was in a band called Dead Ringer.
Oh, no, the first one was Three Ring Circus—which was just for a battle of the bands, and we did a mix of Smashing Pumpkins and Marilyn Manson. I was in middle school at the time.
And then I was in Dead Ringer, which was with my buddy Robert (he was in The Ancient Void for a long time and then he had life change on him).
Robert and I were in a litany of bands. It was really just us two making music for a long time. But, you know, we called ourselves Cryptic Chaos for a while. We called ourselves a couple other less flattering names. And then we came to The Ancient Void and did that for a while.

I was in high school band—well, I was in orchestra, so I played the violin in middle school, then started playing the drums, and was doing death metal vocals in high school, then in college, and then was in the army and started doing it again...

Yeah, so I've been in bands for—I mean, almost 30 years. This has been the longest stretch that I haven't been playing music in probably 20 years for the last year now (if it's even been that long, it might have only been six or seven months). But when I'm done with my PhD and I get a real job and figure out what the hell I'm gonna do when I grow up, then I'll probably make another band or something.

Q11–Q12: Do you often perform live?
We did, last year—when I was in like four bands, I mean, I was playing almost every week. And then as I started trickling out of the bands, that number went down. But when I was with Left Hand Hot Dog, the ska band (I was their drummer), I mean, I was playing all the time. We played at least one show a month but normally played like three a month, and then we went on tour. So, like, yeah, there was a lot of playing live.

4. Vocal Training and Technique
Q13: How long have you been active as a singer of extreme metal?
Yep—as a singer of extra metal? Yeah, since I was like 14.

Q14: How did you learn those techniques?
I taught myself. When I was young, I picked up mimicry as a way of teaching myself things, so, you know, when I first heard like Phil Anselmo or Max from Sepultura, I was immediately copying them.
I was pretty good at manipulating my vocal cords to sound different ways, so I picked it up pretty quick. Then it became a matter of being able to focus tension in the diaphragm.
Later on, I started watching YouTube videos, and I usually watched how opera singers would do things. Then I would take that approach for setting up the way I would stand or do whatever, and then modify everything happening up here (head/neck/throat) for what I was doing.

I dated a girl (very briefly)—she was an opera vocal coach, wound up being kind of famous, which was neat—but she taught me about glottal pressure and trying to maintain it by, like, getting the structures in your throat positioned a certain way and then blowing through like a coffee straw and then just holding everything in position there. When I learned how to do that, it helped me relax everything and increased my capacity to sustain the extreme death metal approach for longer periods of time.

Q15: Any lessons or formal extreme vocal tutoring?
You mentioned some videos on YouTube. Any sort of, like, extreme vocal tutoring?
Not really. There was—I forget what she called herself—she's like the metal coach or whatever and she did DVDs 20 years ago. I saw some of her videos on YouTube, but that was really it.

Q16: Describe your learning style.
The way I learn... It's funny because I made a learning model in my dissertation, so it's been interesting. I coach boxing for a living and I work with people that have cognitive disabilities, so I really like to examine the way people learn things. What I notice is I like taking tools that sit on the periphery of the thing I'm trying to learn and I like to use non-typical tools in atypical ways to construct my own way of doing things. That is sometimes successful, sometimes not. I could just do things the easy way, but I'm stubborn.

Q17: Do you follow any routines to maintain your voice?
I've tried all the tricks: the sprays, the honey, the tea. None of that works for me.
Coffee—black coffee—works better than anything. When I was playing shows where we were playing back-to-back nights, I would just brew coffee or go to the gas station to get coffee, and for some reason it works better than anything else for me. I think it's just that there's a lot of oil in coffee and I think that's what it is.
Tea always dried my throat out, but coffee...
So you like drink it before the show? Or during the show?
During the show. I'm sure on YouTube there's video of me playing and we'd be in the middle of the set, finish the song, I'd be bullshitting with the audience for a minute, then drinking my coffee—it would just be in a cup just like this—and then put it right back down and go right into the next song.

I don't really like warming up. I coach boxing for a living, I go through the same five minute warm-up routine and that's it. I'm a competitive fencer. I usually let my first match be my warm-up—it's not the best approach, but it's the one I'm most comfortable with. For me, the "let me get shocked into getting warm" just helps me more. When I warm up, I get nervous.

Every show where I'd be like, "Oh, I'm gonna go in the corner, warm up with my little guitar," I'd get up there and just lay an egg for the first song. But if I was just like, "take a shot of whiskey, drink a little bit of coffee, and then—oh we're up!" and yank the guitar out of the case, get on stage, flip the amp to on, and it was go—I wouldn't have the same technical prowess at first but my performance energy was way better.

It took me 20 years to figure out: the audience does not care about when you screw up. 99.9999% of the time they can't even tell. So just go out there, have the energy, and project the energy—the crowd will feel it. That will get you a lot farther in the end.

Q18: Studio / recording approach vs live
Studio like recordings—how different is your approach to vocals when you record?
I wish I had some kind of sage wisdom for that. Most of the recording I ever did, I just did in my basement. When we actually recorded for real, I took two takes—one take for one set of vocals, the other for the other set, and that was it. But that was because the studio was paid for.
Steven, the guy that runs Cancer Records out in West Point, Georgia (he's in a band called the Bada Bings), he's not a metal guy but his recording process and the way he can make bands sound is amazing. I would have minimal effects if anything on my voice—just a touch of reverb and decay.
He would have let me take a thousand takes but honestly, I'd just get myself hyped. That's when I’d synthetically hype myself up so I'd be able to come in and knock the performance out, because I knew if you do it too long your vocal cords are going to start to give out… So for three songs at a time: let's do the three songs—two takes, two takes, two takes, and my voice would hold up fine. If I tried to do too many takes, the quality would vacillate.

Know what you’re gonna say! Even if you know the words, write them out. Underline syllables and pickup notes so every time you do it, you can do it the exact same way—helps with precision. Everything sounds better that way.

5. Vocal Style
Q19: Have you ever had health related issues with your vocals due to singing?
No. Again, I was in the army, so I used to yell a lot. As a boxing coach, I yell a lot, and I have a really loud voice because of all that yelling over time. Especially in the army, they teach you how to yell; as a drill sergeant you really learn to push from the diaphragm. My experience working with drill sergeants helped me figure out how to tighten my diaphragm in a way that—I can push a lot of air over a relatively long amount of time.
No, I mean—you know, I say that and I could have throat cancer for all I know, but that’s probably for all the smoking and drinking I did for a long time.

Q20: How would you describe your vocal style?
When you do old-school death metal? Just as cavemanny as possible. You ever watch Metalocalypse?
Oh yeah. Okay, yeah—very, very much just the Nathan Explosion. More into, like, growling, guttural—yeah, that direction, definitely more of that.

Some songs, I'll do like a black metal parts of it. Or, if I was doing death metal for long sets (like four shows over five days, all 30–45 minute sets), if my death metal vocals were getting to the point where I was having trouble sustaining them, I would switch to black metal and it would give me a break. Every once in a while I’d bounce back and forth just on a whim.

When you say switch to black metal, you mean the screech?
Yeah.

6. Perception of Extreme Vocals
Q22: Is intelligibility important to you as a vocalist?
When you scream or growl, is it important to be actually understood?
You know what, I really appreciate that question.
One of the consistent pieces of feedback that I've gotten from people in other bands or from people that never listened to metal at all was: they appreciated the fact that almost every word that I would say, they could understand.
It is sort of important for me. Well, the other thing, I also don't write nonsense lyrics. And I don't mean that to cast dispersions or castigate anybody, but I don't like lyrics that don't have personal meaning.
You just can't tell me that like... "Sanded Faceless," right? I don't think there's any personal meaning in that song to whoever wrote the lyrics.

I always wrote songs that were either directly what I intended to say or at least a metaphor of a thing I was thinking or feeling or both. So to me, if I'm gonna go through that much effort to have meaningful lyrics, I want at least some people to be able to understand them.

And when you listen to metal?
It's funny. It depends on the band. I learn the lyrics if I can understand them. I've been listening to metal for long enough that I can understand most death metal vocals. I'm not even gonna pretend to say I know all the words, but I can pick up most of it. There are some bands where I don't know what they're saying, and I'm just like, "Eh, whatever." Cannibal Corpse sometimes falls into that, where I'm like... But yeah, so...

I generally like it better when I know what they're saying—and what they're saying is intelligent. It doesn't have to be; that's by no means a prerequisite for me to listen to metal. But when I'm like, "Oh, I really like what he's saying there, and how that's reflected in the music?"—when I can do that, that's good craftsmanship.
You could go up there, "blaaarggh" for 20 minutes, but if it doesn't speak to me, I'll just be like, "You're a great guitar player, that drummer is very fast, that vocalist has a unique style—but if it doesn't say anything to me, I'm not as engaged."

Gatecreeper—you familiar with Gatecreeper?
So they're, I think, from Arizona. None of the lyrics, I don't think, have any personal meaning at least that I understand, but they have such a good mix of straight up Neanderthalic death metal but then these very emotive passages. And I'm just constantly impressed by their ability to do that.
Then you hear the lyrics or you read the lyrics and you're like, "Oh, that's what he's saying." Seems like this should be a lot more emotionally resonating. Other side of that is maybe the lyrics are meaningful to him—they're just a metaphor, and I'm just a dumbass.

Asphyx—you familiar with them?
That is one of my favorite bands. For much the same reason. "Last Man on Earth," or "Minefield"—that song—you know, I was a combat engineer in the army, so that song has a lot of meaning to me because I've been exposed to having to look for explosives, exposed to some of those things.
Songs like that that resonate with me, I definitely can get more out of.

Q23: Why do you think non-metal listeners find extreme vocals hard to understand/enjoy?
I think—and I also grew up in an era where metal was not nearly as accepted as it is today. When I was in high school (god, I'm gonna sound like an old man here), there was like 10 metalheads—10 of us. My buddy Grant Foils was the ringleader of us all... we were in our own little clique because everyone else thought we were weirdos. We'd get beat up or in other ways harassed.
It was because they're like, "Oh, look at those goth weirdos."
I think one thing is people have a perception of metal—which is not unjustified—where what they see is just senseless or mindless aggression. There is an aspect of that; that is part of it, but that's not the entirety. There's a lot of community, and there are a lot of studies out there showing that people who allow themselves to have that kind of emotive release are generally healthier in mental health.

There's a lot of counterculture music types or lifestyle types—metal is more than just music; there is a lifestyle component. If you're a metalhead, you probably go to live shows, hang out with other people that do too, probably wear some kind of denim jacket and a black t-shirt…
I think people who feel excluded by that or sometimes threatened by it because of their misconceptions—that just steered them away from it.
A lot of metal (I dare say most) is written in an abrasive fashion: heavy distortion, generally fast, generally played loud. The mix is different from other music. Some guy is yelling at you, not singing about lollipops and puppy dogs.

There's a much more deliberate countercultural movement—back in the day, like Twisted Sister—a lot of political messaging that came along with the music. Dee Snider was petitioning on Capitol Hill about free speech, and kids being thrown in jail because people thought they were devil worshippers (the Memphis Three). The memory of those things still remains, even if we don't still live in that era.
Even now, cultural preconceptions persist. You would never hear a Metallica concert advertised on the radio in 2000. Now we get their banners.

7. Melody & Rhythm in Extreme Vocals
Q25: What about melody in extreme vocals?
I have—if you're Peter Steele and your voice is deeper than mine, I'm all about hearing it.
Oh god, this is going to be a controversial take…
Are you familiar with Woods of Ypres?
They're Canadian, their singer unfortunately passed away (from a car wreck some time ago); they're like a black metal version of Type O. The guy has a very deep Peter Steele kind of vocal approach, on top of doing black metal too.

Sometimes he wrote super emotive songs (emotionally driven that I couldn't relate to), but some are powerful—like "Wet Leather." People in the YouTube comments talk about how stupid the lyrics are—the lyrics to that song are brilliant: they present a couple themes about the irony of life. He sings in a baritone register, then has brief black metal sequences in it—it's perfect. The irony of what he's saying with his delivery is fantastic. If you read the lyrics and you're not a moron, you'll get it.

There are some bands—this will be a controversial take—I'm just not really a big fan of like grindcore and deathcore. The more... I don't want to hear what sounds like emotional caterwauling interrupting your gutturals, especially because some of these guys can bottom out...

Now, like, what's his name—John Gallagher from Dying Fetus. I learned his vocal approach because him and the guy from Suffocation have a very unique approach, and I really like it.
You get the vocal cords in the position of a high timbre, then you go low and force air through it to sustain it. It sounds really cool.
But neither Dying Fetus nor Suffocation have weird interludes of "emo music" thrown in there. That's not my thing. And I know a lot of people like that, and I don't mean to trash their opinions—it's just for me: I'd rather stick my arm in a blender.

There are some bands who do it well: Arch Enemy, for example, will have passages of clean stuff. I like that.

I don't like tropes people use for capital gain.

Ever heard of Zeal and Ardor? There's them, and then some black metal band—I put in the same category—people are like "Oh, they're so artistic," but all I see is them ripping off other bands and piecing it together in a commercially acceptable way. I hate that.
I saw Zeal and Ardor—it was just mimicry of other bands even in the stage moves. Their music is some kind of metal, some kind of other stuff. I saw them with (maybe) Gojira—not sure.

All I see is intellectual property theft. If you can't come up with an original approach, don't do it, even if it makes you a bunch of money. I believe in artistic integrity. The things that limit you should be skill. Never try to augment your skill by ripping somebody off.