18 y.o., Male


Musical Taste


How did you get into music?

I had some friends that—they were in this local band while I was in middle school. They were in high school. I just loved watching them play and stuff. And then more and more of my friends started doing that, getting into music, and then finally got into heavier stuff as well. Ever since then, it's been my goal to try to make music myself but also expand on what I listen to.

What were those bands called?

I'm pretty sure it's 99 Meltdown, and then another one of my friends are in a band called Futon.

Was it heavy from the start?

At the beginning it was mainly, I guess, like 70s and 80s rock—kind of just the general stuff that everyone gets introduced to when they get into rock. Then I listened to more 2000s stuff and metalcore and post-hardcore stuff, and I really loved that.

Can you name some favorite bands?

Yeah, so one band that I've been listening to pretty frequently recently is Meshuggah. I really love Pierce the Veil, My Chemical Romance, Lamb of God, Avenged Sevenfold—stuff like that.

Why metal? What do you find in it?

Personally, I think that a lot of metal elements also stem from jazz music and pop music and stuff. The heaviness of it stood out to me because it's something you can move to and it's something that has always been uplifting.

Subgenres you like (besides metalcore/emo)?

Prog metal.

Any bands you said? 

Meshuggah, Tool. 

There's this one other Swedish metal band that I really like. I don't know how to pronounce their name though because it's not English. It starts with a V. I think it's Viltiark or something.

Anything besides metal that you like listening to?

Honestly, I can't think of it. Nothing much. I can't think of it.


Musical Background


Do you play any musical instruments?

Yes, I do. I play a few—I play the drums, I play guitar, I play bass, I can play piano, I sing as well.

Do you write music as well?

Yes I do.

Have you received any formal musical education?

I've been—I was in chorus since I graduated this year. I was in chorus for the longevity that I was in high school and that really brought up a lot of opportunities for me to travel around and spread my love for singing.

Any other classes to learn instruments or theory?

No, everything else other than singing I've taught myself.

Are you currently in a band?

Yes, I am.

What is the band called?

Pretty Lucky.

How long have you been in Pretty Lucky?

I've been in Pretty Lucky for just a few months—mainly, the name actually stems from my drummer. His name is Lucky. And we've got one song that we're in the studio right now trying to actually get out there and stuff. I've helped the other band that I mentioned, Futon—I was in that band as well. I was their bassist and I helped them make songs in the beginning and stuff. Then I left after they were on their journey producing music.

Overall band experience (in years)?

Mainly, coming together and trying to put everyone's different music tastes together. Not everyone in a band is going to have the exact same music taste, so it's really just listening and coming together on what sounds good to all of y'all instead of just one person.

Do you often do live performances?

No.

Have you ever had?

No.

Have you recorded anything at the studio? You mentioned you've been recording some stuff at the studio. (details below)


Vocal Training and Technique


How long have you been active as a singer of extreme metal?

I would say I got into it about three years ago. When I started listening to new metal actually, I really wanted to do the screaming and stuff and at first, you know, it was hard because that was one thing that I was also trying to teach myself. But after talking to some friends for a while and getting help from my singing teacher, these three years have been wonderful and learning how to sing extreme without hurting your vocals and without it hurting you in the long run as well.

Health related issues because of singing/metal vocals?

In the beginning, I mainly thought that just the screaming was just screaming—like it was just fully belching out as much as you could. Then after trying that and then not being able to speak for like two days, I was like, "this isn't how it's done I'm pretty sure." So, watching YouTube and stuff and then getting my singing teacher—it's definitely helped a lot. Sometimes I even struggle with it now, you know, with work sometimes I don't have enough time throughout the week to sing and then it'll be like a couple weeks before I can actually rehearse with my band again and it's like I'm a little rusty. But I think it's very important to learn a proper singing technique early on because you can definitely grow from that.

How did you learn those extreme techniques?

One of my friends, his name is Sully, he's actually really big into like the hardcore scene around here in Atlanta, and his brother's in a band called Kong Style. I've been to a few of their shows. But Sully is also able to do the extreme vocals and stuff and when I watched him do it, his face—it didn't look like he was struggling at all, it just looked like he was talking in a way. He told me how, like, not everything is just trying to be as loud as you can be, but there are techniques to where you can produce that grit without hurting yourself every day.

Could you go into detail a little more about those techniques, especially when you produce them?

Honestly, I haven't looked too much into, like, how I'm actually producing the sounds, but I know that it feels different than singing for sure because when I'm doing the screams and the growls and stuff, it feels like almost it's in the bottom of my throat. With your throat, like, I know with your vocal cords and stuff, they can hit together and stuff—that's how sound is produced. With that, that's what it feels like—the flaps just like really close to each other and it sounds like that's what's making the sound instead of screaming at the top of my lungs or just yelling—it's like controlled. Sometimes it just feels like breathing, you know—it's natural.

Do you do any exercise or have a warm-up routine for your voice?

I've done—I do a few warm ups sometimes. I need to get in the habit for sure of doing more warm ups, but right now I don't really do any warm ups; I just kind of throw myself out there into singing.

And like before your band rehearsal as well—yeah, you just go ahead and scream?

Yeah, just go ahead.


Vocal Style


How would you describe your vocal style in metal?

I would describe it as a large variety, I think, because I really like—I think I can sing like normally good and then with the screams and stuff it's like almost separating it into another category. I've tried after listening to Lamb of God and Meshuggah and a lot of new metal bands to get that kind of produced scream out there, but also I've tried to add some naturality to it because, you know, I think a lot of modern songs kind of sound like too produced. Like guitars and vocals and the drums and stuff—all of it kind of sounds like a machine, so whenever I hear singers or any extreme metal vocalist and I can like feel their voice, that's something that moves me—it doesn't sound produced.

Can you name some vocalists that influenced your style?

You know, off the top of my head that would be great. Am I allowed to look them up? Some of their names I just forget but I've definitely had a lot of influences over the years. The singer for Meshuggah (I think his name is Jens Kidman), the singer for Lamb of God, actually Fred Durst (it kind of sounds weird to say but yeah), Slipknot—Corey Taylor (big influence as well), early on I know James Hetfield was a big influence for me because he had that natural grit to his voice. I know it's basic to say because it's Metallica, but I think he's a good singer.


Vocal Techniques


Could you list some extreme metal vocal techniques that you know?

Recently, I've been working on trying to be able to do higher screams instead of lower ones. Some techniques that I've learned:

Putting your tongue at the top of your mouth—it makes air move in a weird way in your mouth and kind of shapes the sound in a weird way

Moving your tongue while you're doing that across the top of your mouth can change notes while you're doing like squeals or screaming and stuff

In chorus I was a bass two, so I was the lowest—using that ability to kind of put my Adam's apple all the way in the bottom of my throat and produce like a really low growl, that's another technique. So, overall, like screaming, something high, and growling. Yeah, I think tongue placement, honestly, is something that I've learned recently that matters a lot that I should have looked into a long time ago.

You were the second one who used the tongue technique. Interesting, interesting.


Perception of Extreme Vocals


Do you pay attention to lyrics when listening to extreme vocals? Is this important to you?

Yeah, I actually do pay attention to the lyrics a lot. Even if some bands—the lyrics sound like you can't hear them at all, I try to look up the lyrics or anything I can to understand the singing.
Because even though it's screaming, I think there's a lot of passion that goes into it and a lot of background as well.

Do you try to be understood when you perform?

Yeah, I think that's an important element. When I try to do screams and stuff, I try to articulate my words the best I can—even though it's not the best. With choral singing and just singing in general, I've been taught that articulating your words and making sure you have the right diction and stuff is necessary because there's not a lot of point in vocals if they make no sense or you can't understand them.

Do you think it is possible to have melody in screaming or growling?

I think there is a melody. I know—there's—I know Corey Taylor is good at it, but actually adding notes to the screams instead of it just being like a growl or something but actually adding music theory to it and you can hear the note that you sing. Corey Taylor—Wait and Bleed, for example—there is something. Yeah.

Do you think melody can help improve intelligibility in extreme metal?

I think so. Because—another thing, a lot of modern music kind of sounds like machinery, it's kind of lost its touch of originalness. I think being able to do the harsh vocals but also add a melody to it and make it sound pretty, even though that's not the main goal of harsh vocals, it's astounding, and songs that already have a great melody with guitars and stuff.

What about rhythm in extreme vocals?

I haven't really thought a lot about the rhythm of extreme vocals, but I know that with all of the tracks laying underneath—like the drums and the guitar and the bass and stuff—that adds its own rhythm. What I can say is, listening to prog music, what I've learned more and more is that all the instruments don't have to be going the same rhythm—they can be doing their own thing, just as long as there's an understanding through everyone what the time signature is, what the verses are, what the chorus is—just as long as everything lines up. Everything doesn't have to be the same rhythm/time signature and it adds fruitfulness to the music.
