22 y.o., Male


Musical Taste


How did you get into music?

When I was 14, I started playing the guitar and then that's when I really started to learn how to play music that I wanted to play.

How did you get into metal music? What inspired you?

My friend introduced me to a band called Suicide Silence and the song "Disengage" was the first song that I really tried to learn. I love Suicide Silence and when I first heard the riff — "chung-chung-chung-chung…" — that really got me into it. And then right after that was followed by a blast beat. Ever since then, I've been into metal.

What metal genres/subgenres do you listen to?

I like progressive metal. I like hardcore music. I like deathcore and I like some doom metal. Some doom metal, yes. Do you know this guy who went wild on TikTok? I don't know what they would band he played when he's from the 70s. Oh yeah, that's Pentagram. Yep. That guy's terrifying.

What genres of music do you listen to besides metal?

I like a lot of slowcore music. I like punk music. That's hard 'cause I'm definitely a metalhead. A little bit indie stuff, Mac DeMarco, Bob Dylan. There's this band called 40 Watts Sun — I don't know if you've heard of them — that I really like. He used to be in a metal band and now it's like a slowcore kind of band. That really likes it. That's like dirge rock. It's pretty much it.



Musical Background


Do you play any instruments? You play guitar, right?

Yes.

Do you play any other instruments?

Play some bass, but it's mainly the guitar.

Acoustic or electric or both?

Both, mainly acoustic nowadays. Playing a lot of acoustic.

Do you also compose music?

Yes.

How long have you been writing music?

Since I was 14, so eight years now, about.

Do you have any formal musical education?

No.

So you are self-taught?

Absolutely.

Are you currently a member of a band?

No, I'm doing my own solo stuff right now.

Have you been in a band before?

Yes.

Can you tell me a little bit?

Yeah, it was called James Meiser. We were just a heavy alternative rock band that we combined a wide variety of genres from hardcore, punk, metal and jazz fusion.

Wow, I would love to take a listen to that.

Oh, it’s fun. Just fusion. I enjoy that.

Have you performed live many times?

30 times, over 30 times, yeah.

What sort of venue?

Okay, so the Masquerade — a couple times, we've played at the Masquerade three times, I think. Smith's Olde Bar. Lots of people's basements. We've played a couple of rap festivals; we somehow ended up on those kinds of bills. Lots of DIY stuff.

Have you played in Wendy?

No.

Not Wendy, that's a joke, that's a joke. We tried to play outside of a Sonic one time but the cops came and kicked everybody out. Turns out they don't want people to have fun. No, not at all.


Vocal Training and Technique


How long have you been active as a singer of extreme metal or just metal?

Active — the last four years, last four or five years. That's when I started playing in cover bands and in my old band.

How did you learn some of the extreme vocal techniques?

I learned a lot of it through making mistakes. A lot of it is just finding out how you can do it without damaging your voice. I feel like once you start doing that, that's when you can find your niche in your voice. So I would learn by watching covers of professionals scream and I would look, I would — I've done research, just tutorials on how to scream properly. I'm still definitely learning. I have my strengths and weaknesses for sure. And I just do it in my car because there's no other people, there's no other place and it's not appropriate anywhere else. So... I've always thought that it is actually pretty hard to do. I can't do any of that. I play drums and that's basically… I'm definitely good at the snarls and the gutturals and the low stuff. The high stuff I'm still trying to work on without damaging my voice, but the second I see that it's starting to hurt my throat, I back away and try another technique, because only have one.

Vocal techniques you are capable of producing?

Snarls has been like my favorite thing to do. I wouldn't be able to name them, to be honest. Maybe screaming — yeah, I could do some screaming.

Do you see it as a kind of technique or just…?

I do see it as a technique because you actually have to practice the way you shape, like singing through your diaphragm. I feel like, you know, I had to learn how to do that, because there's definitely a wrong way to do it. So, I'd say like that is a technique. There's a couple screaming techniques that I had to practice on: doing very high-pitch, false chords that you can actually belt out. So that kind of stuff I can do.

If somebody asked you to list all possible extreme metal vocal techniques, what would you say?

I would say you have guttural, there are pig squeals, there are high screams.

Like Suicide Silence one?

Yeah — that guy can do very high, very high stuff. That's all that I can name right now. I'm not really good at identifying; there's definitely someone else better than me.

Have you taken vocal lessons?

Never, never, not once — self-taught.

Do you follow any specific vocal exercises or routines to just maintain your voice?

No, nothing.

Do you use any technique to protect your voice?

Singing through my diaphragm and not singing just directly through my throat. That is what has protected my vocals.

Have you ever experienced issues like health issues while singing, screaming?

Health issues, no. I've had — there's been times where I would go way too hard on stage. Because when you're in your car, or when you're in a setting like this, your body is not exhausted from two-stepping or running around on stage and trying to entertain a number of people. So, you won't really do it in an isolated setting like this, but whenever you're going live and you are jumping around and doing all this kind of stuff and then you try to belt out, there'll be some times where I would just scream way too hard when I'm already at a low battery and so I will feel like I have a lung that is starting to collapse — that will happen on stage, and that sucks, that hurts.

But you overcame that?

Yes. It made you stronger? By singing within my means, yeah.

Do you notice any differences in your vocal approach between live performances and recording studio or rehearsal?

Yes.

Can we go into details?

They're more profound and they're more intense in the studio, but whenever it's live, you got to take into account: the room is set up a different way, the audio quality is set up a different way. People aren't gonna hear you the way they will hear you in a studio. Whenever you're live, I can see them sometimes not coming out as strong. Whenever I'm live with my older band, I would do these higher notes and I would distort them live, but in the studio I can do them high and they'd sound very clean. But because I'm exhausted from moving around or I'm putting more work into myself physically, I would have to distort my voice so I could actually hit that note more, I noticed. I know better. Some musicians, you know, when they do live shows, I'm talking about vocalists — you see that they're a bit tired and they just give up, they, you know, ask the audience to sing along. Also you're nervous, you're under pressure. I'm not — I don't even experience like that much stage fright, but you're still under so much pressure though to do a good job, yeah, make sure you look good whenever you're doing it too because you got this. Plus when you're the front man, you're pretty much the image of the entire show for a big part of it.

It's hard but fun.

Oh, it's so much fun.

Have you recorded vocals at a studio before?

Yeah.

Did you enjoy the experience?

Yes, that's straightforward. Totally, yeah.


Perception of Extreme Vocals


Is intelligibility an important goal at all? Is it important that people should understand the lyrics you're screaming?

No, I don't think it's important that they understand exactly what that person is singing about, screaming about. If they can get anything from it, even just from a few syllables that you can make out and they can take something from it or at least sing along back to it — you're pretty much doing the job.
There are a lot of songs where — okay, can I give you an example? There's this band called Torture; have you heard of these guys? The singer is the drummer and you cannot make out a single word that that guy says — it is all [demonstrates incomprehensible vocals]. That's what the dude sounds like. But apparently he's singing about anti-war propaganda, he's singing about how war is bad and how we should not be engaging in combat with other countries, and he's singing about genocide. But you would not know that unless you read the bio on their Spotify page. But when you go to the shows, he talks about it and then the song starts and he's back to [incomprehensible vocals]. So I feel like it's a lot about aesthetics of the band and the aesthetics of the vocals and the riff. I think that's what's more important — not you being able to tell exactly what the song is about.

When it comes to clean singing, is it also not so important, or…?

I think it's not so important there either — it's what you take from it. I want it once someone to go, "Hey, this is my song, what did you think it's about?" and they tell you what they think it's about and then you say, "Well, that's not right because that's not what it's about." I feel like you should allow people to interpret whatever they want to interpret — that's how they enjoy it. There shouldn't be rules to the way you think. I personally — I do pay lots of attention to vocals, but, you know, I can only understand… Vocals are my most important, that's kind of what I focus on the most, but it's mainly just how they sound and made me feel, not quite what they're writing about. I personally just perceive it as an instrument, as another timbre as you get there.

What about some other people, especially non-metal listeners — why do you think some of them find extreme vocals hard to understand?

Do you think some of them can find extreme vocals hard to understand?

Hard to understand as in, like, understand why other people like them or just don't know what he's saying?

Let's do both.

A lot of people who didn't grow up with those types of influences, maybe they grew up with any other genre other than extreme metal, they'll find it too loud, they'll say that it is too chaotic, they'll say that it's losing meaning inside that wall of sound that extreme metal makes. A lot of people are looking for a clear meaning. This is no hate on any other genre, but let's say you listen to Taylor Swift — that is your favorite artist — you can tell what she writes about, and there is a solid rhythm in that kind of music. Let's say she's your favorite artist. And then you're going to go now and listen to something like Gojira (one of my favorite metal bands); that can be super progressive in rhythm, it's not 4/4, it's progressive. They would have trouble getting used to that kind of rhythm, and then they would also have trouble hearing what he's saying because that guy — he yells and sings at the same time under a very complicated guitar riff and drum technique. It's just a completely different thing. A lot of stuff can be really simple, and then there's the complicated stuff that kind of gets thrown at them all at once; they can't break it down the same way.

So you think extreme metal is more complex overall?

In sound, yes.

Do you have any thoughts about melody or pitch in extreme vocals?

Yes, I think it's super important. I feel like you can, even if you're just supposed to be yelling, you can definitely yell on key. As far as doing the extreme extreme where there's not that much of a note in there, there always is a note in there. It wasn't invented; it's always been a thing. I think that is really important — that you can learn how to scream on key, because anyone who's a musician or who isn't can know when you're not on key. That's a natural thing that humans can — even with screaming — can tell.
We're gonna be doing… I feel like screaming can be a lot more of a rhythm thing, but I feel like there is a key in there that you need to find. That's something that I'm still trying to learn how to do, but that's a really interesting thing to get into.

Do you think that extreme vocals can also convey melody?

Yes.

Any thoughts about rhythm in extreme vocals?

Rhythm is super important. I feel like it's more rhythm-based than it is melody-based. Accenting your notes — that's also really important too.