23 y.o., Female


Musical Taste


How did you get into music?

Pretty much, I would say my influences are Linkin Park. Chester Bennington—he inspired me, you know, to want to be a singer. So, yeah, he was a nice guy, you know.

What about their new vocalist, what do you think?

I think she's pretty good, but I'm not really a fan of their new sound. I prefer their older albums with Chester when he was alive. Because, you know, it's a controversial topic, because some people have this mindset like, when the lead frontman kind of leaves the band, the band falls apart. Yeah.

Chester Bennington. Any other figures or bands that influenced you?

Sevendust is a big one—Lajon Witherspoon, he's one of my role models. Straight Line Stitch—Alexis Brown, I look up to a lot.

How did you get into metal music?

Pretty much just Linkin Park introduced me, and then from that point on, I just started diving into Slipknot, Korn, Arch Enemy, more bands I'm not thinking right now, but yeah, I like those bands that you mentioned—Arch Enemy, they were in Atlanta. And Lorna Shore, I love Lorna Shore. Lorna Shore, yeah.

Any specific subgenres of metal that you like, and maybe why?

I would say post-grudge... gosh, that's a job. Nice. Nu metal. Alternative, but I feel like that's like a generic term.

Other genres besides metal?

Pop rock, pop punk.

Anything besides metal maybe?

I like probably like freestyle music from like the 80s and 90s, I don't know if that makes sense, like "Tell It To My Heart" by Taylor Dayne. Tell it to my heart—oh, yeah, that like, it's like dance music.

Why dance, maybe?

Just—I like how it makes you feel.


Musical Background


Do you play any musical instruments yourself?

I know I can play a little bit of the guitar, but I'm not proficient at it.

The acoustic?

Acoustic, yes.

Do you compose music?

No.

Never tried?

No, I would like to though—I'm open to it.

Are you in a band?

Yes, I'm currently in two small local rock bands.

What are they called?

First band is called Knock Down Drag Out, and then the second band is called The Band Luminous.

What kind of music are you playing in the bands?

Knock Down Drag Out—we're like pop rock, and then the second band, we're still trying to figure out our sound, but I know their influences are like Black Sabbath and Jimi Hendrix. So, yeah. Old school. The origin of the OG metal.

How long have you been in those bands?

KDDO, first band, I want to say about—I joined summer of 2023, so that's like, what, almost three and a half years-ish?

Do you often do live shows?

No, but we're trying to like, you know, start doing that more. But we do rehearse every Saturday, but I know recently they've been doing renovations in the basement—that's where we practice—so we haven't been having practice like that, dude.

Have you recorded? Are you planning to?

No.

Have you ever recorded anything before?

No, but I would definitely love to, so that's going to be your first time at the studio. Oh, I've been to studio before but… Are you talking about like recording something and then saving it or just your studio experience? OK, I've experienced studio experience, yeah.


Vocal Training and Technique


How long have you been active as a vocalist / metal vocalist?

I would say ever since I joined KDDO, so three and a half years as well.

Can you describe your vocal style? Voice type and techniques you use more often than others?

So my voice type: I'm an alto, which is like the lowest female voice type, and I do clean vocals—that's more of my strong suit. I try to, like, you know, do false chords or fry screaming—I mean, like I said, does not sound that good, but, you know, I would like… It's very—sometimes you're saying it sounded like… somebody else might do the opposite.

How did you learn how to sing (and how to maybe scream)?

Singing—I've been singing ever since I was little, but recently—not recently, I want to say—was it… no, it was December of last year, I started taking vocal lessons, and that's helped me a lot.
For screaming—pretty much is imitating, like, sort of, you know, my favorite role models.

Do you do any growling?

No, I would like to, though.

You said you've taken lessons—was it some sort of formal musical education, or just…?

I guess you would say formal—like, you know, vocal warm-ups and then singing from your diaphragm. Yeah, that.

And you do follow those?

Oh yeah, definitely!

Do you have any routines to maintain your voice?

Pretty much I try to every day just do vocal warm-ups and, like, you know, drink enough water.

What kind of warm-ups do you do exactly?

So the lip trills—like "brrrrr"—and then like "mommy, me, me, mess, my M&Ms," like, you know, syllables and all that.

Have you ever had any issues with your voice because of singing or screaming?

I would say sometimes I'll have like a pitch issue—like I'll—either go… most of the time I go sharp. I don't know, like I'll go either sharp or flat; most of the time it's sharp. And then, you know, lack of breath—like I don't… like, most… sometimes I'll use my diaphragm.


Perception & Intelligibility


Our experiment is about intelligibility—how much people actually understand when they listen to metal music, screaming, growling, the words. Is it important for you to understand everything when you listen to metal music (the lyrics)?

I would say so, typically; but at the same time, I'm listening, "what are they doing with their voice?" Like, oh, how does he get like "ohh" like that? What part of the voice are they using to produce that sound?

And when you are singing with your band, is it important for you too, so that everyone understands when you're screaming / what you're growling—is it any important to you?

I know the first band—they're not really a fan of that (screaming/growling), second band seems more open to it.


Melody & Rhythm in Extreme Vocals


Any thoughts on melody in screaming or growling? Can there be melody?

I believe so, yeah.

Do you think some sort of melody can help improve intelligibility of extreme vocals?

Possibly, we'll see.

What about rhythm? Does rhythm help intelligibility, or influence perception?

I'm trying to think, like, what's the term, like, whether the means…
Like, does it help improve intelligibility, or...? Does it influence the perception? Because we'll be having some excerpts here with very random rhythm—no rhythm at all, no rhythm pattern, sounds like the guy just saying something.But sometimes you do get like very precise pattern that you hear.

Do you pay attention to the rhythm when you listen to…?

Typically, no. I mainly listen for the melody.