27 y.o., Male


Musical Taste


How did you get into music?

How I got into music? Yeah, in general life—I was born, music exists, therefore I got into it. I really fell deep into loving music in middle school, you know—a time of angst, depression, puberty, lovely stuff. Music was kind of an outlet. I feel like that's how it normally goes. Yeah, just took me away from all the stress of being a middle schooler, as hard as that was. Talking about metal music now or just me?
Yeah, it was metal. But just before that I was like, yeah, music exists, I like it, it's not an outlet yet. Then middle school happened—specifically, my formative middle school years, so like eighth grade. My family told me that we were moving across the country and I was, you know, heartbroken by that news. Coincidentally, my friends were discovering emo music at the time (I say emo with an asterisk because it was not really emo—it was more like MCR, Pierce the Veil, Black Veil Brides, Sleeping With Sirens—post-hardcore stuff). Still really emotional stuff and it kind of stuck to me, I really identified with it. Specifically because this was a time of a lot of turmoil in my life. I was about to have to leave all my best friends, my childhood town, my hometown, and yeah, I needed some kind of healthy coping mechanism. So music was there. I played guitar by this time—I had been playing guitar for about three years and I played classic rock before that but I didn't really… I liked it, but I didn't really identify with it. It was more so my dad was like, “hey, you should learn these songs by these bands.” Now, in eighth grade, I was finally discovering music that I liked, that I loved, on my own. It was emotional.

What subgenres/styles (emo/metal/etc.)? You mentioned emo—and what else?

Yeah, I wouldn't really say the stuff that I listened to in eighth grade was emo, more emotional. Like—emo as a genre, it wasn't that. As I said, it was post-hardcore (technical term), just had really emotional lyricism and I held on to that for a few years. As late as late high school, I was listening to the same stuff, wasn't really branching out. It was just Asking Alexandria (big one for me), Pierce the Veil stuck with me for a while. After high school, friends were like, "You listen to the same stuff since middle school, you gotta branch out!" So that's when I discovered Bad Omens, Chelsea Grin (although I don't really identify as a fan—just that genre), so this was like during college. I also discovered the lighter side of metal—some people would call emo, like MCR. During this time, I was actually enjoying their music and diving deep. Now I would consider myself a cult follower of My Chemical Romance. Also during this time (middle of college), I discovered Lorna Shore. I was rediscovering Suicide Silence, because I knew a few songs from middle school (that was when Mitch Lucker died, the band was getting publicity because of that), so I knew about them from that, but it was during this time that I was actually learning their songs, how to play or sing along. Some other bands I discovered... Wait, what was the original question? About the subgenres of metal?—yeah, OK. During college, I branched out both heavier and lighter in terms of metal. I also started discovering EDM—so I don't explicitly listen to metal. I listen to a bit of EDM, specifically Skrillex–styled brostep/dubstep, because I also listened to him even before metal. So the very first genre that I fell in love with was dubstep, when "First of the Year" ("Equinox") came out. That was huge at my school. That genre and metal share a lot of the same qualities: both very intense, high energy. So I don't think it's too bizarre being a fan of both genres.

Current influences and expansion?

Recent years—after college I've been branching out even more. Stuff like Sleep Token (broke up/blew up—wearing their shirt now), they're less pure metal and more classical tones, drum'n'bass, and progressive metal (which I love, love the mathcore aspect to their music). After college, I started really getting into local Atlanta bands—Callous Daoboys, I fell in love with them (seen them three times now, as recently as a few weekends ago). I love their stuff because it's super experimental and it's mathcore. I just love experimental weird music in addition to the radio rock stuff like MCR.

Any non-metal genres you like?

…discovered EDM (Skrillex, etc.), brostep, dubstep. [Уточнено выше.]


Musical Background


Do you play any musical instruments?

Guitar—yeah. Where did I start? I started playing clarinet (my first instrument). I was a huge fan of SpongeBob and so when it came time to join school band, clarinet had a pull on me. I was like, “I want to learn that one.” So I did and I loved it. I played it for 8–10 years—from fifth grade until 12th grade (so seven years). I played it in jazz band. Around that time I also learned piano because my friend had a guitar and I had a keyboard. So I was learning piano while he was learning guitar and we would try to play songs together (didn't go so well). I was learning piano for probably a year, maybe two. When I would see my friend, I would pick up his guitar, he'd teach me a few chords. The first song I ever learned from him was "Dream On" by Aerosmith (almost said "aerospace" because of my major). After that, my parents saw I had interest in guitar and they also saw I was a rock star on Guitar Hero, so that's their reasoning for giving me guitar lessons—"Well, you can play the shit out of Guitar Hero, you could probably do it for real." So, started guitar lessons for Christmas, sixth grade, started those, had my first performance within three months. Since then, I've been performing: I joined the jazz band in high school (guitar), marching band (guitar, senior year), performed for that. Since then, in college and after, I really took an interest in writing for guitar as well as learning more complicated songs. The reason I got into the music I did today is because guitar had a huge influence on it—whatever songs I was learning, I tended to have more interest in those. If a song was fun to play, it was more likely to become a favorite.

Band experience

I was in jazz band as mentioned (clarinet and then guitar). Around seventh/eighth grade, there was a talent show—formed a band for it, performed once (we were horrible, but I loved it). After moving down here, I went bandless for a few years (outside of school). I tried to form multiple bands—it's just hard to meet people who play instruments and like the same kind of music. Not in a band for a while, then found this band that wanted to make Bring Me The Horizon–style music (I think they're called Fadeless or something—up-and-coming). Whoever's listening could check them out, they're planning to make their first single this year. I am the guitarist (planned to sing backup, said I have a lovely voice, better than the other band members).

How long in Fadeless?

No official induction, I'll say November-ish last year, so about 7–8 months.


Vocal Training and Technique


How long have you been doing extreme vocals?

I started trying to do extreme/harsh vocals as soon as I started listening to post-hardcore music, so like eighth grade I tried (no technique). Ninth grade, I actually tried learning a technique, recorded a cover of Asking Alexandria in my bedroom (sounded horrible). In college, made a friend who liked the same music, we tried to learn together. As far as actual learning: about 5–6 years; before that, just an amateur trying to make noise. Especially within the last three years, I really tried dedicating time to it—but it's all those amateur years of failing and hurting my voice that really shaped my progress and made it so quick. Actually started teaching myself in 2022; middle of 2025 now—so only three years.

How did you learn?

Watched a lot of YouTube/Instagram reels, really it's just practice. I'd watch videos: "this is what you should be trying, this is what you should be feeling—if you feel X, stop, wait till tomorrow, try again." It's just getting used to the sensation you should be feeling and recognizing when you're feeling something you shouldn't, saying "OK, I need to stop." I've only had one vocal lesson—about a month ago. Before then, I was really unconfident with my vocals; teacher said, "dude you have a fantastic foundation," just need to tone it in. Since then, much more confident with how I sound.

Vocal exercises and routines / warm-ups?

I do humming (specific 10 min video: tongue out), puffy cheeks hum up and down scales; lip trills, tongue trills, then sing along to easy-to-sing songs (Sleep Token is in a lower register—easy to sing, part of the reason I got so stuck with them; sing their songs to warm up, also good for vocal inflection, runs).
Once warmed up, can hit mixed voice, then some light screams/growls (false cord). Honestly, I don't really need to warm up for my shouty vocal—Brian Garris style (Noctlus)—feel comfortable with that even without warming up.

Any health issues due to vocals?

No. There was a period (2023) I stopped vocals for a few months, then it was hard to relearn in 2024 ("essentially had to start from scratch"); other than that, no permanent damage (as far as I know), just hiccups along the way.


Vocal Style and Techniques


How would you describe your vocal style?

My vocal style—I've been told by my vocal teacher (one lesson) that I have a very high resonance (talk/sing "up here," not back in throat). Probably from listening to so many pop-punk/emo songs, whiny guys singing (early 2000s).

Extreme techniques:

Most comfortable with shout vocal (Brian Garris / Poppy style): learned from Bring Me The Horizon early stuff, screaming along (“sounds like he’s blowing out his vocal cords, that’s how it sounds when I do it”). Not too harsh, still want to learn more techniques, but most comfortable with fry and getting more comfortable with false cords.

How would you describe these two techniques (fry/false cord)?

False cord: "pushing air through the most relaxed state your throat can be in," like clearing throat and pushing with diaphragm—"hhhrmmm" then move tongue for different vowel sounds/tones.

Can we say it's "growling"? 

Yes, it does sound like a growl.

Fry: Uses a different part of the throat. Not easy to describe. Sounds like someone crying out in pain—feels higher in the tract, a thinner, airy sound.

Screaming, screaming vs. growling?

"Screaming" for me is umbrella: can be fry, false cord, or in between (in high/low register). Both fry and false cord can be low or high, so if you do false cord in low it's growling, in high—screaming; with fry, can do both.

Are there other types?

Yes: tunnel scream (false cord, tongue twisted), gutturals (toilety/gross sound, tongue all the way forward), tea kettle/whistle screams (hi-freq, high register), pig squeals (high register, but can be growly).

Hardcore/yelling/shout scream?

Super easy for me (I figured it out first). Like a yelly/shouty vocal—a Brian Garris/Noctlus style. You can do it chesty, head voice, even falsetto.


Live vs Studio

Approach to vocals at studio vs. live?

I've not performed vocals live, so can't say.


Intelligibility


Is intelligibility important to you—do you pay attention to lyrics as listener?

Absolutely. If the larynx is not in the correct position, it'll sound like you are hurting yourself (and probably you are). You can adjust the larynx for different sounds, but you have to control it—if not in the right place, it's risky.
(Note: here, a misunderstanding, question was about lyrics, but answer refers to larynx. See below for direct answer).

Lyrics intelligibility—how do you make your lyrics intelligible / is it important?

Enunciation is the biggest decider in intelligibility. One of my favorite vocalists, Will Ramos (Lorna Shore), is known for his intelligibility—he does all these crazy techniques but you can still make out the words; a lot of deathcore bands just sound like they're "buring." Making stops in your mouth between sentences, phrases, words—even syllables—is huge for being understood.

Why do non-metal listeners find extreme vocals hard to understand/like?

Because they can't make sense of the lyrics, not used to the sounds, and also lack of clear enunciation/rhythm sometimes.


Melody and Rhythm in Extreme Vocals


How important are melody and rhythm for you? Do they affect intelligibility?

I'm most interested in the more melodic deathcore (how Lorna Shore got its "boom" in the past years—more melodic, less drone). Melody adds detail, makes it more interesting. As for intelligibility—my belief is inconclusive; maybe, but not sure.

Rhythm—I think it plays a lot to do with intelligibility. My hypothesis: if a phrase is vocalized without rhythm, you can't just do something without rhythm. If a phrase is broken up with a more suited rhythm for the words, then it would be more intelligible—that is my hypothesis.