44 y.o., Female


Musical Taste


How did you get into music?

I was a chorus nerd growing up. So I sang in like all of the school choirs, got into show choir. But in high school, found a smaller scene of musicians through friends.
I had been hanging out with a bunch of hippie kids and playing covers back then in a cover band, but found out that they were throwing weird punk and metal shows out of VFW in my small town in South Carolina. And that's pretty much where it started.

Is this how you also got into metal music?

Yes. I'd always liked it. I'd always been punk-leaning because I was really into skateboarding, even though I was terrible at it. So a lot of my friends were listening to punk, and then going to live shows kind of morphed that. Obviously, in the 80s as a kid, I liked hair metal and stuff like that because it was flashy and fun, but yeah, it grew as I grew.

What inspired you in punk music and metal music?

For me, it was something different. Pop music has never really appealed to me. It's boring.
So this kind of scratched an itch that I didn't really know that I had. And once you kind of meet the community that's surrounding punk and metal scenes, you just realize there's so much more depth to it than what's being force-fed to you on TV and radio.

Which metal subgenres do you listen to regularly?

So I am more towards the hardcore leaning stuff. So I liked a lot of noise and we called it screamo growing up, but they call it scrams now. I was really into that in the late 90s and early 2000s.
I have my one-off straight up metal likes like Converge and Grease and all that stuff that I feel like just coexist in those scenes anyway.
But yeah, it's been more hardcore leaning.

Why hardcore? Why do you like it?

You know, I think at first it was just because it was something that felt exclusive. As a kid, it was very niche. It felt like your own little secret scene thing that other people didn't know about.
But I also really liked how it was, like, there was a lot of politically-driven things. There was a lot of community-driven things. I feel like I grew more in social awareness through that scene and just getting to meet people from all different walks of life that are experiencing something in a similar way. It was very different, and 16-year-old me was all about it.

Do you listen to any other genres besides hardcore or metal?

Yeah, I mean, I have my little synth-goth part. I grew up listening to a lot of The Cure, and when the 2000s hit, there was this whole—well, they call it Indie Sleaze now, but back then, it was just synth wave or synth music.
So I got into The Faint and The Rapture and all this type of stuff that had a real dancy element to it, because it was just fun and kind of just not very serious.




Musical Background



Do you play any musical instruments?

I play bass, though I choose not to now because I was never super great at it.
It's easier to just do vocals. I play very minimal guitar and I play very minimal synth keyboard.

How long have you been playing those instruments?

I got my first acoustic guitar when I was 14 and picked up the bass when I was 18.

Do you compose music?

So yes, I write. It's mostly better when it's collaborative because I'm not super self-motivated when it comes to actually composing music and writing the actual riffs and things like that. But yes, I do.

Do you have any formal musical education?

Only in vocals. Everything else was learned by ear, self-taught.

Vocal education details:

Yeah, I just—I grew up always, if there was an opportunity to be part of a chorus or choir, I grew up in that. When I got to high school, I joined in the show choir and got into the drama club and all those things were interchangeable. I went to college briefly with a major in drama, minor in voice, but ended up dropping out—just got really wrapped up in being 19 and only caring about going to shows and doing those types of things.



Band Experience



Are you currently a member of a band?

Yes. I currently sing for Los Ojos Muertos.

Main role in this band:

Singer (main role).

How long have you been singing for them?

Just a little over three years.

Any other bands in the past?

Yeah. I played bass and sang in an indie-style band called Castalia.
I also played keyboard and did backup vocals in a goth/new wave band.
And then I played bass in an old scrams band in the early 2000s.

How would you describe your current band, the music that you do?

It's like thrash punk, hardcore leaning.

Do you often perform live? How often?
Yes. We try to at least get out there once a month. We did slow it down—we were playing multiple times a month and it got to be a lot. There's just so much going on in Atlanta all the time. So at least once a month now.



Vocal Training and Technique


How long have you been active as a singer of hardcore or metal music?

Yeah, so this is actually a new venture for me. Even though I grew up loving it, I was never brave enough to do it. When we first started this project, it was more like—we didn't know what we wanted to do, but we knew it was going to be in the punk genre. At first, it felt more like pop punk, but as we started evolving riffs and I started getting more comfortable trying to scream, I realized I actually enjoy doing that more.

How did you learn extreme vocal techniques?

Yeah. Very awkwardly, to be quite frank. It wasn't pretty at first and watching old videos are—it's painful. But I was really just trying to find the comfortable spot in my chest and throat that didn't feel like it was damaging, and it felt like it came out more naturally. Obviously, I watched some videos—I don't know any names, I can't reference them—but I tried to figure out fry vocals, "Am I doing it wrong?" because I didn't want to do any long-term damage. It was just a lot of awkward fumbling until I found something comfortable.

Have you taken any lessons to learn extreme vocal?

No, so—self-taught.

Do you have or follow any routines to maintain your voice, to protect it maybe?

It's actually easier the more consistently we practice. We try to get in at least two practices a week where we go through a whole set just to keep the strength behind it. I try not to do too many damaging things to my voice—I don't smoke or anything like that. It's really about practice for me—when we have large gaps, it feels harder to jump back in.

Have you ever had any health-related issues because of screaming or growling?

So far, no.



Vocal Style


How would you describe your vocal style?

It's definitely more screamy fry, with some singing parts to it. A lot of it lives in my chest and it's very loud—I don't know how you describe it.

Any other techniques?

No, not really. I don't get into growling and things like that—it doesn't feel natural to me. Singing in general comes easy to me, so just using my normal singing voice is the most natural feeling. But as we progress and write, we're cutting out a lot of the singing and just going straight up balls to the wall.

Vocalists or bands that influenced your vocal style

Justin Pearson's voice from The Locust (switches between screaming and real snotty, vomiting, speaking type punk vocals)

Rainer Maria—indie emo band from the nineties; Caitlin Amars’s voice, always just very pleasing

Brody Dalle (The Distillers)—very straight up rock and roll voice, "her snarl and growl come so naturally, it's just very raspy"

Cody and Jordan from The Blood Brothers—"a lot of dynamic in the way they do things... I’ve pulled from a lot of that stuff"



Studio & Live Experience


Have you ever recorded vocals at the studio?

Yes, we have a full-length out and an EP out.

Differences in vocal approach between live and studio?

Yeah, definitely. One—recording feels awkward, takes a minute to get into it. The emotion isn't quite there, the same drive as live on stage. So recording can feel reserved, takes a moment to get out of your head. But I find it tends to be more controlled when we're recording. Whereas live, I'm up there jumping around, out of breath, all that good stuff.



Perception & Intelligibility


Is it important for you to be understood as a vocalist?

Yeah, I try to be as clear as possible. Especially because a lot of the messaging in the songs—I don’t mind reading a lyric sheet, but I'd love to be able to listen and pick it up along the way as I become familiar.

When you listen to extreme vocals, is it important to you?

Yeah, yes.

And what about when you perform, when you sing (important for listeners to understand)?

Yeah. I want to make sure when we're talking about current politics or other topics, it's understood. The goal is having people sing along and feel comfortable doing so. It's really just about trying to be as clear as possible, but not lose the edge.

There are some techniques that are less intelligible than others.

Yes, correct. I don't dislike that stuff—I listen to lots of things that take a lyric sheet to really know what's going on. Just for me, I try to be as clear as possible.

Do you do anything to be more intelligible—articulate better when you use extreme vocal?

Yeah. I definitely find finding the comfortable place where the volume and stamina can come out, but using my mouth to over-enunciate really helps put the words together better.
That might just be my opinion—people probably listen to me and say, "what the hell is she saying?"

Why do you think some people (especially non-metal listeners) find extreme vocals difficult to understand?

I think a lot of times, aggressiveness comes off as off-putting to some people—like, some people just don't like, they hear screaming and assume anger or the devil or all these undertones that come along with the metal scene. Yes, it's there in a lot of it, but not all of it. They're just like—it sounds like a bunch of noise, I don't want to listen to something I can't understand, it's angry. It really depends on someone's vibe. With metal, for people who enjoy it (myself included), I find it relaxing to put it on as loud as I can in my car on the way to work and decompress and shut my brain off and just enjoy music for what it is. The same way I imagine somebody probably puts on Taylor Swift and does that—it's just appealing.



Melody & Rhythm in Extreme Vocals


How do you think about melody or pitch in extreme vocals?

Yeah, I try. Something I try to do is not be too monotonic. I like there to be dynamic.
I think that helps with the overall depth of the song—you can have amazing riffs, a strong drummer, but if you put the wrong vocalist in front of those things, it falls flat. So I love to hear dynamic. You will find me fry-talking all the way into a screech—just for effect, to keep people's attention.

What about rhythm in extreme vocals?

Rhythm—I think it teeters for me because not everything I like I would say the vocalist is super rhythmic. For me, I enjoy for things to sync up and have that intensity to it. Rhythm definitely is a strong undertone to driving the intensity of things. For me, yes, I prefer rhythm.



Perception of Techniques & Emotions


On "screaming," "growling," and perceptual classes:
From the listener perspective, people often hear the words like "screaming" or "growling," whereas metal vocalists often use words like "high fry," "mid fry," "false chord," etc.
My idea is that there are some so-called perceptual classes—give us some feelings—we hear something and we feel, okay, it's somebody that's screaming... or growling. But to achieve those classes, vocalists use different approaches or techniques. Your thoughts on this?

Yeah, I think it's definitely—for me, I'm more of the high fry. It's a preference of mine when listening to other bands. I think it changes the overall mood of the song, but it really helps shape what the overall vibe is. Death metal, all of that—I was calling it a growl, I don't know if that's the appropriate term—but those things all have their own very specific identifiers. That helps shape where you fall within subgenres and finding other things that you like.

Do you associate these techniques or classes with emotions or archetypes (like animals)?

I don't think I've ever thought about that. Are you saying, like, a screeching hawk type thing? Or a bear or something? No, I can't say I've ever thought about that. Obviously, I've laughed at videos online when it's like, and then it cuts to a bird or something—but no, I can't say I've ever thought about that.

What about emotions?

For me with emotions, a lot depends on the lyrical content, that's usually pretty important to me—what the song is about. But I would say it is coming from a place of angst, anger, I don't want to say desperation, but it's usually like you're trying to get a message out and you're literally doing it in the most extreme way possible.

Earliest example of growls in music you can recall:

There was a band I saw—they're from San Diego, and I remember the singer's name is Travis. He would do cattle decapitation. It was like he was doing two things at once—I could not fathom the noise coming out of him, but there was this low growl happening with a weird screech overtone. It was impressive. The band was amazing—straight up grind type stuff. I remember just being like, what the heck is this?

Earliest example of screaming:

My hometown had a local band and they had two front guys—that was my first time seeing a hardcore band. I was hooked, like, hooked.



Women in Metal



Do you think that women are underrepresented in metal scene?

I think it's getting better. It's a very challenging scene to tap into and not be seen as a gimmick or a niche. I've had to address getting offered nothing but "female-fronted" bills and things like that—I just want to play with badass bands. I love my female camaraderie and love to see badass women up there holding their own. But the problem is, it becomes more of a spectacle a lot of times and not being seen as equal to a real musician. I do think it's getting better—a lot of badass women and femmes out there doing the damn thing right now for sure. But it's been very challenging. Punk scene in general grew up with a lot of ignorance and misogyny and a lot of unlearning things as time has progressed.

What are the reasons for women being underrepresented in metal?

Let's be real—when we think back to the 80s, women were very sexualized, right? All those cock rock bands, playgirl poster stuff. Even if there were women musicians, it was hyper-sexualized.
Getting to a place where you don't have to sexualize yourself just to be seen as an entertainer or musician—it's been a challenge.