20 y.o, Male, USA

Q	Male	20	9/5/2025	24


Musical Taste


How did you get into music?

So it started mainly because of my sister and my brother-in-law. They introduced me to some of the things that I listen to now. So it started mostly with like punk genre and kind of evolved into, hey, check out this band. And then I started listening to stuff like Korn, which is more like metal related.
And then as I went through high school, I started to develop my own tastes and discover new things within the genre. So eventually my music taste started getting like heavier and heavier, and I started to listen to a variety of things.

What inspired you in punk and metal music?

One of my inspirations that I feel like people probably wouldn't expect is I really like Lionel Richie. So I like The Commodores, and I also like his solo stuff.
But for metal, currently, it would be the band Boundaries. The vocalist, Matt McDougall, his lyricism is like one of the best I've seen so far. It's so raw and poetic at the same time. So that's a huge inspiration for me. And also I like his vocal style.

Do you listen to anything else besides metal?

I like ambient records. So a lot of ambient instrumentals. There's one by this band called Loath. They're actually a metal band, but they also have like this whole album that's just ambience, and it features really nice, soft saxophone in one of the tracks. I feel like I'm being transported somewhere else. It's a beautiful track.



Musical Background



Do you play any instruments?

I mean, I have a guitar. I'm not the best at it, but I do have this MIDI keyboard I like to use for side projects because I also like to make ambient music. Other than that, it's pretty much just the MIDI keyboard.

Do you compose music? What's the process like?

Yeah. For the stuff that I'm currently working on, the solo stuff, I kind of just start with finding the right bass synth. And I just play around with chords that I like, feeling it out. For this recent track, I found three to four chords I liked, held them out and changed between for a minute and a half to two minutes.
So I start with that and it makes it easier to layer things on top versus starting with a blank canvas and leading with the melody. I like to start with the foundation.

What tools do you use?

For my digital audio workstation, I like to use Reaper. Some people prefer Logic Pro or FL Studio, but I just like the interface of Reaper much better. It seems less confusing.

Do you have any formal musical education?

I actually used to be in band. I played the trumpet in sixth grade all the way till ninth grade. And in ninth grade, I did marching band for a year.



Band Experience


Are you currently a member of a band?

Yes. Yes, I am. I'm in a Glass Edge.

How long have you been in it?

A year and a half now.

What is your main role?

I'm the vocalist.

What type of music do you play?

We do metalcore. It’s a fun genre because we get to pretty much do whatever we want. It’s kind of an umbrella term nowadays. Mainly screams and stuff, but we have parts where our rhythm guitarist will do clean vocals too.

Have you been in other bands before?

No, this is my first one.

Do you often perform live?

Yes. We actually played at the Masquerade the night before school classes started.

How often do you perform?

This month, we don’t have shows, but I would say it’s about maybe once a month.

Have you recorded vocals in the studio?

We actually are working on our EP right now. It’s being mixed and mastered, but I think we’ll have our latest single ready to be released hopefully within this month, if not next month.

Difference in vocal approach, live vs. studio?

When I’m doing live shows, I feel like I’m a bit more loosened up. It’s easier for me to warm up for screaming and stuff versus in the studio. It kind of takes me a minute to get where I need to get. I’m not sure why that is, but it just makes it easier to play live.



Vocal Training & Technique



How long have you been active as a metal vocalist?

I started experimenting with that kind of stuff when I was like 17 and a half, but didn’t take it fully serious until probably the start of my freshman year of college. That’s when I started, like, okay, every day I’m going to practice my vocals to sound better and try to progress somewhere.

How did you learn those techniques?

Primarily, it was YouTube and Reddit. My primary way of doing vocals is called false chords. So I learned that through YouTube and Reddit, mainly learning how to do it the safe way—because once you practice how to do it the safe way, you can pretty much do it on your own. Just consistent practice and building that muscle memory to feel it out, and from there it just got better and better as time went on.

Taken any lessons apart from YouTube, Reddit?

No, did it on my own.

Routine to protect or maintain your voice?

When we’re going to have a show, I typically go on vocal rest—try to talk as little as possible (very hard for me because I like to talk a lot). Also, only room temperature water, because cold water can cause my throat to tighten up. Sometimes tea with honey helps.
Same thing with recording. Also, on a day-to-day basis, I try not to scream unless I’m practicing and try to keep things consistent.

Any warm-up exercises?

Yeah, but it’s just like "caveman noises"—just grunting over and over again. I’d do it now, but the walls are kind of thin. That’s my main way of warming up—I’ll just hold that for 30 seconds and do it over and over again.

Health related issues because of screaming?

No, I don’t think I have.



Vocal Style & Techniques



How would you describe your vocal style?

It’s kind of raw sounding as I do false cords, so it’s a little bit more edgier.

You mentioned false cords. Any other specific techniques?

I want to learn fry screams, but I have had no luck trying to figure out how to do it. Tried for like a year and just could not get how people do it.
Our rhythm guitarist can do fry screams—he tried showing me. Still didn’t get it. So it’s primarily false chords that I do.

Your type of screaming is mainly false chords?

Yes.



Perception, Technique, Intelligibility


Do you agree that things like screaming/growling are “perceptual classes,” not techniques?

I definitely agree because some of them, you can have hybrid screams basically. When you do a growl, you can use a false chord style and also do a growl and that will sound different than if you were to use a fry scream and try to do the same growl.
It’s all in how you’re placing your tongue, if your tongue is arched, the shape of your mouth—all affects that. There are a million ways you can combine things together to get different kinds of sounds.

Do you think false cords can be used to do growling?

Yeah, I think that would be the easiest one to do. And screaming as well.

Is intelligibility important for you as a singer?

I'd say for me, yes. I want people to hear what I’m writing, and that’s just part of my vocal style, too. Compared to a lot of the other stuff in the same genre, you can understand what I’m saying better—even though I am screaming, I am a lot more articulate.
That’s just how I am; I can’t try not to be less articulate. I’ve tried that before for certain parts, but I can’t do it—it just comes out articulate no matter what.

When you listen to metal music, is it important to understand the lyrics?

Yeah, typically—because when I listen to music, I like to sit down and listen from an album from start to finish. I’ll have the lyrics pulled up. Some is easier to understand than others.
With metalcore songs, typically it's a lot easier to understand, get a feel for what they're saying, versus deathcore where it's a lot more intense and unintelligible.
But if I’m really focused, I can understand what they’re saying or pick out a few words. If I know the song, you can hear it more clearly once you know the lyrics.

Do you do anything specific to make your vocals more intelligible?

Honestly, no, not really—it just kind of comes out that way.



Melody & Rhythm in Extreme Vocals



Are melody/pitch present in extreme vocals?

Yeah, it exists to a certain degree—not in the same way as normal singing. But I do have lows, mid-range, and high that I do to add for variation. I think it’s important because you don’t want to be monotone.
My voice is kind of high, so I can’t go too low, but I can go high, so I like to go from lower mid-range up high on certain parts.

Rhythm in extreme vocals:

Yeah, sometimes I’ll go with the rhythm guitar—I write lyrics and have a vocal cadence specific to what the guitar is playing sometimes. Other times, I ignore the guitar and make my own rhythm, and it can still mesh correctly. But typically, I write to the rhythm of the guitar.


Emotions, Archetypes, and Roots


Is it appropriate to associate extreme vocals with emotions/archetypes/animals?
Yeah, I’d say so. I’ll get a lot of grizzly bear or alligator; just some sort of primal animal like that.
I think it goes back to when humans, before speech, used false chords to intimidate animals, try to make ourselves seem bigger. So I think there’s a relation.



Earliest example of growling you recall:

Probably one of the Pantera songs from the ‘90s, like “Cowboys from Hell.” There’s definitely grit in their vocals—think that’s where people started getting more extreme.

Earliest example of screaming?

Probably early hardcore when they started to yell instead of sing. Metallica—singing with occasional yelling. In early hardcore, it was all just yelling.



Influences



Name vocalists, bands, artists that have influenced you:

Matt McDougall (Boundaries) — all-time number one

Brian Garris (Knocked Loose)

Connie (CU Space Cowboy)
