28 y.o., Male


Musical Taste



How did you get into music?
I think my dad started playing—was taking guitar lessons when I was like eight or something. I guess I just thought it looked cool, and I started playing guitar.

How did you get into metal music?

I was always into rock and stuff. Growing up, I was into Led Zeppelin, ACDC, that kind of stuff. I got really into all those instrumental prog artists, like Intervals, Plini, Animals as Leaders, and that kind of area. I got really into that when I was in university, around 19, because I just didn't realize you could make this kind of music just with guitar, and I thought that was really sick. My taste kind of snowballed from there. Now I mainly listen just to metal. Before then, I think I was like, any music with screaming vocals—I was like, "I'm not into that."

Any specific subgenres of metal that you particularly enjoy and why?

Progressive metal is probably the main one I listen to—and kind of metalcore, deathcore—but mostly into progressive metal and the stuff around that.

Why do you like tech/progressive metal?

I like the technicality—because I played guitar since I was a kid, it's fun to learn songs that are kind of difficult and technical. In general, I like music that has some interesting kind of vibe or weirdness, experimentation. I get bored with more traditional metal genres; they don't grip me the way prog and the genres around prog do.
Some of my favorite bands growing up were Pink Floyd and Rush, so I think I just evolved—anything that feels cinematic, vibey, psychedelic, that's what I tend to enjoy.

You also mentioned Deathcore?

Yeah, but really it's only specific bands, like Humanity's Last Breath (not sure if it's truly deathcore—it's kind of its own thing), Vildjarda, sometimes early Bring Me the Horizon. But mainly if a deathcore band has something interesting.

Anything besides metal?

Yeah, I like a lot of rock, indie rock, psychedelic rock, jam bands, bluesy stuff—usually centered around rock or rock band instrumentation. Big fan of Jack Johnson (that's its own thing), Tame Impala, jammy/experimental stuff, Pigeons Playing Ping Pong. But mainly, I listen to stuff within rock or indie umbrellas.


Musical Background


What instruments do you play?

Guitar is my main instrument. I also play bass guitar, drums, and then I sing.

Do you write music?

Yes.

Can you describe your composing process? What tools do you use?

I usually write in a DAW (digital audio workstation). I'm the stereotype: use GetGood Drums, Neural DSP guitar tones, sometimes sample bass. I write riffs, drum suites, build out a demo, come up with vocals and record those on top. I try to fully produce a song in the DAW—I don't write tabs for my guitar parts, just come up with ideas, record them. If I want to turn it into an album, I'll hire a drummer and rerecord everything. I use a writing template: drum mix, master chain, guitar tones already set. All done in Reaper ("awesome"/super customizable/stable—way better workflow for me than other DAWs).

Formal musical education?

Not really. I did band in high school, played saxophone, that's the closest. I've also taken some guitar lessons, including online guitar lessons with a teacher (Sean Ash, instrumental guitarist).


Band Experience


Are you currently a member of a band?

Not really. I have a solo project, but I'm not explicitly in a band. The thing is just me making music.

Previous bands?

I was in a jam band at university (played guitar).

How often do you perform live?

These days—never. I did play recently at a conference (Izmir); they do a yearly jam, and last year we did Master of Puppets, there was a mosh pit.


Vocal Training & Technique


How long have you been doing extreme vocals?

About five years—started when I was 22–23.

How did you learn those?

Started by taking a couple of online lessons, found a website that explained fry scream (wanted to sound like Spencer from Periphery). Took a few lessons to get basics; then practiced, recorded stuff. So, yes, very explicitly "screaming lessons".

Do you have a routine/warm-up/exercise for your voice?

Yeah, a bit. I start by doing vocal fry, stuff to get my voice warmed up. I mash together various YouTube video routines (lots of growl-like warmups, scales, arpeggios). I always do a "five-minute vocal warmup" kind of video, then I sing songs—starting from soft clean singing (like Contortionist’s "Clairvoyant") and build up intensity to doing screams.

Have you had any health issues because of vocals?

Not really. If I try to scream two or three days in a row, by the second or third day I won't have the scream anymore, throat feels a bit off—so I space it out. But the more regularly I do it, the longer sessions I can do. Haven't had "legit" health issues; just sometimes need to back off if I feel a bit sore.


Vocal Style & Influences


How would you describe your vocal style?

I pretty much only know fry scream (or what I think is the fry scream).
I would compare it to Meshuggah—the vocalist from Meshuggah is probably closest to how I sound when I scream.
Initially aimed for the Spencer Sotelo (Periphery) type sound, but realized I don't have that range. Modeled my scream on Meshuggah and Between the Buried and Me—practiced covers of those bands, their screams have less range, easy to home in on sound. Now I've been able to expand—doing more low and high screams.

Other vocal/instrumental influences?

Spencer Sotelo (Periphery)

Tommy (Between the Buried and Me)

Vocalist (Meshuggah)

Courtney (Spiritbox, for screams)

Devin Townsend

Invent Animate

Michael Lassard (The Contortionist, for clean singing and older screams)


Vocal Techniques



What techniques do you use or have tried?
Main focus is on fry scream (all the focus of my screaming).
Recently worked more on expanding range (lows and highs), found mouth posture/shape important for achieving lows/highs. Not focused on learning more types right now but would be interested in guttural/deeper types in future.

What techniques are you aware of?

Fry

Guttural

(Interested in): technique for switching from singing to screaming (e.g., what Spencer or Courtney LaPlante do), but haven't mastered

False cord (have seen, but not mastered)

High fry, low fry, etc. (variation via posture/pitch)

Growling, screaming, perceptual classes:

Not super aware of exact difference between a growl and my scream. Sometimes people describe my low screams as growls, but I use the same technique—just change pitch/timbre. Growling seems like a lower, bassier sound; screaming is higher pitched. Both achieved by same fundamental technique for me. "Growl" isn't a specific technique, but more an umbrella or perceptual class.

Hardcore/yelling screaming:

Yelling/shouting (associated with hardcore) feels completely different from fry scream—different vocal projection, much louder. Can't bridge gap between singing and screaming for this reason. Took a lesson on false cord screaming—could help bridge that gap, but haven't mastered it.

Distinguishing fry vs. false cord screams?

Not really—I don't think I would be able to always tell (maybe a more attuned ear could). Personally, false cord screams I've heard don't sound very different from mine.


Perception, Intelligibility


Is intelligibility important to you as a vocalist?

To some extent, but it's less important than for clean singing.

And as a listener?

In general, I don't always pay much attention to lyrics—maybe because I'm a musician. Part of the appeal of extreme vocals is the intensity—it fits the musical passage/emotion. Lyrics can elevate, but I don't care that much if I can't understand the lyrics. That said, I tend to listen to music with more intelligible screaming (not pure unintelligible death metal). I like the intensity and natural, human variability—same reason I like distorted guitars.

Why do non-metal listeners dislike unintelligibility in vocals?

A lot of people do care. When I talk to people who don't listen to metal, not understanding lyrics is the main thing they gripe about—"just screaming/can't even understand what they're saying." It's the number one turn-off for non-metal listeners.
Many people (especially non-musicians) focus on vocals/lyrics in music; I'm more focused on music/emotion.


Melody & Rhythm in Extreme Vocals


Melody in extreme vocals—does it help?

It depends. "Most of the time metal vocals are very melody-less." Bands like Architects do melodic screaming—it fits their poppier, catchy style. Bands like Meshuggah—no melody in vocals, fits their approach. Melody may require less distortion, potentially affecting intelligibility.

Rhythm—does it affect intelligibility?

Maybe a bit. Intelligibility depends more on style, singing technique, and processing (modern metal often has highly compressed vocals, which can help). In bands with extreme rhythms (Meshuggah, Between the Buried and Me), it can distract from lyrics—one listens to the rhythm rather than the words.


History, Archetypes


Earliest example of screaming you can think of?

Modern history: Beatles—"Helter Skelter," or "I Want You (She's So Heavy)"—loud, distorted, yelling. It's not exactly modern screaming technique, but it's what comes to mind.
Other bands like ACDC, Led Zeppelin in the 70s/80s did "distorted singing" when pushing for more volume/intensity.

Animal comparisons:

For growl: "We use growl to describe vocals and also to describe animal sounds." Words like growl, screech come from animal noises—pig squeal is an explicit animal reference. It's natural: lions roar (aggression, danger)—very "metal" associations. So yes, animals are a good way to describe extreme vocals.